-¡Qué poco sabes, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, de achaque de caballería!
Calla y ten paciencia, que día vendrá donde veas por vista de ojos cuán
honrosa cosa es andar en este ejercicio. Si no, dime: ¿qué mayor contento
puede haber en el mundo, o qué gusto puede igualarse al de vencer una
batalla y al de triunfar de su enemigo? Ninguno, sin duda alguna.

-Así debe de ser -respondió Sancho-, puesto que yo no lo sé; sólo sé que,
después que somos caballeros andantes, o vuestra merced lo es (que yo no
hay para qué me cuente en tan honroso número), jamás hemos vencido batalla
alguna, si no fue la del vizcaíno, y aun de aquélla salió vuestra merced
con media oreja y media celada menos; que, después acá, todo ha sido palos
y más palos, puñadas y más puñadas, llevando yo de ventaja el manteamiento
y haberme sucedido por personas encantadas, de quien no puedo vengarme,
para saber hasta dónde llega el gusto del vencimiento del enemigo, como
vuestra merced dice.

-Ésa es la pena que yo tengo y la que tú debes tener, Sancho -respondió don
Quijote-; pero, de aquí adelante, yo procuraré haber a las manos alguna
espada hecha por tal maestría, que al que la trujere consigo no le puedan
hacer ningún género de encantamentos; y aun podría ser que me deparase la
ventura aquella de Amadís, cuando se llamaba el Caballero de la Ardiente
Espada, que fue una de las mejores espadas que tuvo caballero en el mundo,
porque, fuera que tenía la virtud dicha, cortaba como una navaja, y no
había armadura, por fuerte y encantada que fuese, que se le parase delante.
-Yo soy tan venturoso -dijo Sancho- que, cuando eso fuese y vuestra merced
viniese a hallar espada semejante, sólo vendría a servir y aprovechar a los
armados caballeros, como el bálsamo; y los escuderos, que se los papen
duelos.

-No temas eso, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que mejor lo hará el cielo
contigo.

Es estos coloquios iban don Quijote y su escudero, cuando vio don Quijote
que por el camino que iban venía hacia ellos una grande y espesa polvareda;
y, en viéndola, se volvió a Sancho y le dijo:

-Éste es el día, ¡oh Sancho!, en el cual se ha de ver el bien que me tiene
guardado mi suerte; éste es el día, digo, en que se ha de mostrar, tanto
como en otro alguno, el valor de mi brazo, y en el que tengo de hacer obras
que queden escritas en el libro de la Fama por todos los venideros siglos.
¿Ves aquella polvareda que allí se levanta, Sancho? Pues toda es cuajada de
un copiosísimo ejército que de diversas e innumerables gentes por allí
viene marchando.

-A esa cuenta, dos deben de ser -dijo Sancho-, porque desta parte contraria
se levanta asimesmo otra semejante polvareda.

Volvió a mirarlo don Quijote, y vio que así era la verdad; y, alegrándose
sobremanera, pensó, sin duda alguna, que eran dos ejércitos que venían a
embestirse y a encontrarse en mitad de aquella espaciosa llanura; porque
tenía a todas horas y momentos llena la fantasía de aquellas batallas,
encantamentos, sucesos, desatinos, amores, desafíos, que en los libros de
caballerías se cuentan, y todo cuanto hablaba, pensaba o hacía era
encaminado a cosas semejantes. Y la polvareda que había visto la levantaban
dos grandes manadas de ovejas y carneros que, por aquel mesmo camino, de
dos diferentes partes venían, las cuales, con el polvo, no se echaron de
ver hasta que llegaron cerca. Y con tanto ahínco afirmaba don Quijote que
eran ejércitos, que Sancho lo vino a creer y a decirle:

-Señor, ¿pues qué hemos de hacer nosotros?

-¿Qué? -dijo don Quijote-: favorecer y ayudar a los menesterosos y
desvalidos. Y has de saber, Sancho, que este que viene por nuestra frente
le conduce y guía el grande emperador Alifanfarón, señor de la grande isla
Trapobana; este otro que a mis espaldas marcha es el de su enemigo, el rey
de los garamantas, Pentapolén del Arremangado Brazo, porque siempre entra
en las batallas con el brazo derecho desnudo.

-Pues, ¿por qué se quieren tan mal estos dos señores? -preguntó Sancho.
-Quierénse mal -respondió don Quijote- porque este Alefanfarón es un
foribundo pagano y está enamorado de la hija de Pentapolín, que es una muy
fermosa y además agraciada señora, y es cristiana, y su padre no se la
quiere entregar al rey pagano si no deja primero la ley de su falso profeta
Mahoma y se vuelve a la suya.

-¡Para mis barbas -dijo Sancho-, si no hace muy bien Pentapolín, y que le
tengo de ayudar en cuanto pudiere!

-En eso harás lo que debes, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, porque, para entrar
en batallas semejantes, no se requiere ser armado caballero.

-Bien se me alcanza eso -respondió Sancho-, pero, ¿dónde pondremos a este
asno que estemos ciertos de hallarle después de pasada la refriega? Porque
el entrar en ella en semejante caballería no creo que está en uso hasta
agora.

-Así es verdad -dijo don Quijote-. Lo que puedes hacer dél es dejarle a sus
aventuras, ora se pierda o no, porque serán tantos los caballos que
tendremos, después que salgamos vencedores, que aun corre peligro Rocinante
no le trueque por otro. Pero estáme atento y mira, que te quiero dar cuenta
de los caballeros más principales que en estos dos ejércitos vienen. Y,
para que mejor los veas y notes, retirémonos a aquel altillo que allí se
hace, de donde se deben de descubrir los dos ejércitos.

Hiciéronlo ansí, y pusierónse sobre una loma, desde la cual se vieran bien
las dos manadas que a don Quijote se le hicieron ejército, si las nubes del
polvo que levantaban no les turbara y cegara la vista; pero, con todo esto,
viendo en su imaginación lo que no veía ni había, con voz levantada comenzó
a decir:

-Aquel caballero que allí ves de las armas jaldes, que trae en el escudo un
león coronado, rendido a los pies de una doncella, es el valeroso
Laurcalco, señor de la Puente de Plata; el otro de las armas de las flores
de oro, que trae en el escudo tres coronas de plata en campo azul, es el
temido Micocolembo, gran duque de Quirocia; el otro de los miembros
giganteos, que está a su derecha mano, es el nunca medroso Brandabarbarán
de Boliche, señor de las tres Arabias, que viene armado de aquel cuero de
serpiente, y tiene por escudo una puerta que, según es fama, es una de las
del templo que derribó Sansón, cuando con su muerte se vengó de sus
enemigos. Pero vuelve los ojos a estotra parte y verás delante y en la
frente destotro ejército al siempre vencedor y jamás vencido Timonel de
Carcajona, príncipe de la Nueva Vizcaya, que viene armado con las armas
partidas a cuarteles, azules, verdes, blancas y amarillas, y trae en el
escudo un gato de oro en campo leonado, con una letra que dice: Miau, que
es el principio del nombre de su dama, que, según se dice, es la sin par
Miulina, hija del duque Alfeñiquén del Algarbe; el otro, que carga y oprime
los lomos de aquella poderosa alfana, que trae las armas como nieve blancas
y el escudo blanco y sin empresa alguna, es un caballero novel, de nación
francés, llamado Pierres Papín, señor de las baronías de Utrique; el otro,
que bate las ijadas con los herrados carcaños a aquella pintada y ligera
cebra, y trae las armas de los veros azules, es el poderoso duque de
Nerbia, Espartafilardo del Bosque, que trae por empresa en el escudo una
esparraguera, con una letra en castellano que dice así: Rastrea mi suerte.
Y desta manera fue nombrando muchos caballeros del uno y del otro
escuadrón, que él se imaginaba, y a todos les dio sus armas, colores,
empresas y motes de improviso, llevado de la imaginación de su nunca vista
locura; y, sin parar, prosiguió diciendo:

-A este escuadrón frontero forman y hacen gentes de diversas naciones: aquí
están los que bebían las dulces aguas del famoso Janto; los montuosos que
pisan los masílicos campos; los que criban el finísimo y menudo oro en la
felice Arabia; los que gozan las famosas y frescas riberas del claro
Termodonte; los que sangran por muchas y diversas vías al dorado Pactolo;
los númidas, dudosos en sus promesas; los persas, arcos y flechas famosos;
los partos, los medos, que pelean huyendo; los árabes, de mudables casas;
los citas, tan crueles como blancos; los etiopes, de horadados labios, y
otras infinitas naciones, cuyos rostros conozco y veo, aunque de los
nombres no me acuerdo. En estotro escuadrón vienen los que beben las
corrientes cristalinas del olivífero Betis; los que tersan y pulen sus
rostros con el licor del siempre rico y dorado Tajo; los que gozan las
provechosas aguas del divino Genil; los que pisan los tartesios campos, de
pastos abundantes; los que se alegran en los elíseos jerezanos prados; los
manchegos, ricos y coronados de rubias espigas; los de hierro vestidos,
reliquias antiguas de la sangre goda; los que en Pisuerga se bañan, famoso
por la mansedumbre de su corriente; los que su ganado apacientan en las
estendidas dehesas del tortuoso Guadiana, celebrado por su escondido curso;
los que tiemblan con el frío del silvoso Pirineo y con los blancos copos
del levantado Apenino; finalmente, cuantos toda la Europa en sí contiene y
encierra.

¡Válame Dios, y cuántas provincias dijo, cuántas naciones nombró, dándole a
cada una, con maravillosa presteza, los atributos que le pertenecían, todo
absorto y empapado en lo que había leído en sus libros mentirosos!
Estaba Sancho Panza colgado de sus palabras, sin hablar ninguna, y, de
cuando en cuando, volvía la cabeza a ver si veía los caballeros y gigantes
que su amo nombraba; y, como no descubría a ninguno, le dijo:

-Señor, encomiendo al diablo hombre, ni gigante, ni caballero de cuantos
vuestra merced dice parece por todo esto; a lo menos, yo no los veo; quizá
todo debe ser encantamento, como las fantasmas de anoche.

-¿Cómo dices eso? -respondió don Quijote-. ¿No oyes el relinchar de los
caballos, el tocar de los clarines, el ruido de los atambores?

-No oigo otra cosa -respondió Sancho- sino muchos balidos de ovejas y
carneros.

Y así era la verdad, porque ya llegaban cerca los dos rebaños.

-El miedo que tienes -dijo don Quijote- te hace, Sancho, que ni veas ni
oyas a derechas; porque uno de los efectos del miedo es turbar los sentidos
y hacer que las cosas no parezcan lo que son; y si es que tanto temes,
retírate a una parte y déjame solo, que solo basto a dar la victoria a la
parte a quien yo diere mi ayuda.

Y, diciendo esto, puso las espuelas a Rocinante, y, puesta la lanza en el
ristre, bajó de la costezuela como un rayo. Diole voces Sancho, diciéndole:
-¡Vuélvase vuestra merced, señor don Quijote, que voto a Dios que son
carneros y ovejas las que va a embestir! ¡Vuélvase, desdichado del padre
que me engendró! ¿Qué locura es ésta? Mire que no hay gigante ni caballero
alguno, ni gatos, ni armas, ni escudos partidos ni enteros, ni veros azules
ni endiablados. ¿Qué es lo que hace? ¡Pecador soy yo a Dios!

Ni por ésas volvió don Quijote; antes, en altas voces, iba diciendo:
-¡Ea, caballeros, los que seguís y militáis debajo de las banderas del
valeroso emperador Pentapolín del Arremangado Brazo, seguidme todos: veréis
cuán fácilmente le doy venganza de su enemigo Alefanfarón de la Trapobana!
Esto diciendo, se entró por medio del escuadrón de las ovejas, y comenzó de
alanceallas con tanto coraje y denuedo como si de veras alanceara a sus
mortales enemigos. Los pastores y ganaderos que con la manada venían
dábanle voces que no hiciese aquello; pero, viendo que no aprovechaban,
desciñéronse las hondas y comenzaron a saludalle los oídos con piedras como
el puño. Don Quijote no se curaba de las piedras; antes, discurriendo a
todas partes, decía:

-¿Adónde estás, soberbio Alifanfuón? Vente a mí; que un caballero solo soy,
que desea, de solo a solo, probar tus fuerzas y quitarte la vida, en pena
de la que das al valeroso Pentapolín Garamanta.

Llegó en esto una peladilla de arroyo, y, dándole en un lado, le sepultó
dos costillas en el cuerpo. Viéndose tan maltrecho, creyó sin duda que
estaba muerto o malferido, y, acordándose de su licor, sacó su alcuza y
púsosela a la boca, y comenzó a echar licor en el estómago; mas, antes que
acabase de envasar lo que a él le parecía que era bastante, llegó otra
almendra y diole en la mano y en el alcuza tan de lleno que se la hizo
pedazos, llevándole de camino tres o cuatro dientes y muelas de la boca, y
machucándole malamente dos dedos de la mano.

Tal fue el golpe primero, y tal el segundo, que le fue forzoso al pobre
caballero dar consigo del caballo abajo. Llegáronse a él los pastores y
creyeron que le habían muerto; y así, con mucha priesa, recogieron su
ganado, y cargaron de las reses muertas, que pasaban de siete, y, sin
averiguar otra cosa, se fueron.

Estábase todo este tiempo Sancho sobre la cuesta, mirando las locuras que
su amo hacía, y arrancábase las barbas, maldiciendo la hora y el punto en
que la fortuna se le había dado a conocer. Viéndole, pues, caído en el
suelo, y que ya los pastores se habían ido, bajó de la cuesta y llegóse a
él, y hallóle de muy mal arte, aunque no había perdido el sentido, y
díjole:

-¿No le decía yo, señor don Quijote, que se volviese, que los que iba a
acometer no eran ejércitos, sino manadas de carneros?

-Como eso puede desparecer y contrahacer aquel ladrón del sabio mi enemigo.
Sábete, Sancho, que es muy fácil cosa a los tales hacernos parecer lo que
quieren, y este maligno que me persigue, envidioso de la gloria que vio que
yo había de alcanzar desta batalla, ha vuelto los escuadrones de enemigos
en manadas de ovejas. Si no, haz una cosa, Sancho, por mi vida, porque te
desengañes y veas ser verdad lo que te digo: sube en tu asno y síguelos
bonitamente, y verás cómo, en alejándose de aquí algún poco, se vuelven en
su ser primero, y, dejando de ser carneros, son hombres hechos y derechos,
como yo te los pinté primero... Pero no vayas agora, que he menester tu
favor y ayuda; llégate a mí y mira cuántas muelas y dientes me faltan, que
me parece que no me ha quedado ninguno en la boca.

Llegóse Sancho tan cerca que casi le metía los ojos en la boca, y fue a
tiempo que ya había obrado el bálsamo en el estómago de don Quijote; y, al
tiempo que Sancho llegó a mirarle la boca, arrojó de sí, más recio que una
escopeta, cuanto dentro tenía, y dio con todo ello en las barbas del
compasivo escudero.

-¡Santa María! -dijo Sancho-, ¿y qué es esto que me ha sucedido? Sin duda,
este pecador está herido de muerte, pues vomita sangre por la boca.
Pero, reparando un poco más en ello, echó de ver en la color, sabor y olor,
que no era sangre, sino el bálsamo de la alcuza que él le había visto
beber; y fue tanto el asco que tomó que, revolviéndosele el estómago,
vomitó las tripas sobre su mismo señor, y quedaron entrambos como de
perlas. Acudió Sancho a su asno para sacar de las alforjas con qué
limpiarse y con qué curar a su amo; y, como no las halló, estuvo a punto de
perder el juicio. Maldíjose de nuevo, y propuso en su corazón de dejar a su
amo y volverse a su tierra, aunque perdiese el salario de lo servido y las
esperanzas del gobierno de la prometida ínsula.

Levantóse en esto don Quijote, y, puesta la mano izquierda en la boca,
porque no se le acabasen de salir los dientes, asió con la otra las riendas
de Rocinante, que nunca se había movido de junto a su amo -tal era de leal
y bien acondicionado-, y fuese adonde su escudero estaba, de pechos sobre
su asno, con la mano en la mejilla, en guisa de hombre pensativo además. Y,
viéndole don Quijote de aquella manera, con muestras de tanta tristeza, le
dijo:

-Sábete, Sancho, que no es un hombre más que otro si no hace más que otro.
Todas estas borrascas que nos suceden son señales de que presto ha de
serenar el tiempo y han de sucedernos bien las cosas; porque no es posible
que el mal ni el bien sean durables, y de aquí se sigue que, habiendo
durado mucho el mal, el bien está ya cerca. Así que, no debes congojarte
por las desgracias que a mí me suceden, pues a ti no te cabe parte dellas.
-¿Cómo no? -respondió Sancho-. Por ventura, el que ayer mantearon, ¿era
otro que el hijo de mi padre? Y las alforjas que hoy me faltan, con todas
mis alhajas, ¿son de otro que del mismo?

-¿Que te faltan las alforjas, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-Sí que me faltan -respondió Sancho.

-Dese modo, no tenemos qué comer hoy -replicó don Quijote.

-Eso fuera -respondió Sancho- cuando faltaran por estos prados las yerbas
que vuestra merced dice que conoce, con que suelen suplir semejantes faltas
los tan malaventurados andantes caballeros como vuestra merced es.
-Con todo eso -respondió don Quijote-, tomara yo ahora más aína un cuartal
de pan, o una hogaza y dos cabezas de sardinas arenques, que cuantas yerbas
describe Dioscórides, aunque fuera el ilustrado por el doctor Laguna. Mas,
con todo esto, sube en tu jumento, Sancho el bueno, y vente tras mí; que
Dios, que es proveedor de todas las cosas, no nos ha de faltar, y más
andando tan en su servicio como andamos, pues no falta a los mosquitos del
aire, ni a los gusanillos de la tierra, ni a los renacuajos del agua; y es
tan piadoso que hace salir su sol sobre los buenos y los malos, y llueve
sobre los injustos y justos.

-Más bueno era vuestra merced -dijo Sancho- para predicador que para
caballero andante.

-De todo sabían y han de saber los caballeros andantes, Sancho -dijo don
Quijote-, porque caballero andante hubo en los pasados siglos que así se
paraba a hacer un sermón o plática, en mitad de un campo real, como si
fuera graduado por la Universidad de París; de donde se infiere que nunca
la lanza embotó la pluma, ni la pluma la lanza.

-Ahora bien, sea así como vuestra merced dice -respondió Sancho-, vamos
ahora de aquí, y procuremos donde alojar esta noche, y quiera Dios que sea
en parte donde no haya mantas, ni manteadores, ni fantasmas, ni moros
encantados; que si los hay, daré al diablo el hato y el garabato.
-Pídeselo tú a Dios, hijo -dijo don Quijote-, y guía tú por donde
quisieres, que esta vez quiero dejar a tu eleción el alojarnos. Pero dame
acá la mano y atiéntame con el dedo, y mira bien cuántos dientes y muelas
me faltan deste lado derecho de la quijada alta, que allí siento el dolor.
Metió Sancho los dedos, y, estándole tentando, le dijo:

-¿Cuántas muelas solía vuestra merced tener en esta parte?

-Cuatro -respondió don Quijote-, fuera de la cordal, todas enteras y muy
sanas.

-Mire vuestra merced bien lo que dice, señor -respondió Sancho.

-Digo cuatro, si no eran cinco -respondió don Quijote-, porque en toda mi
vida me han sacado diente ni muela de la boca, ni se me ha caído ni comido
de neguijón ni de reuma alguna.

-Pues en esta parte de abajo -dijo Sancho- no tiene vuestra merced más de
dos muelas y media, y en la de arriba, ni media ni ninguna, que toda está
rasa como la palma de la mano.

-¡Sin ventura yo! -dijo don Quijote, oyendo las tristes nuevas que su
escudero le daba-, que más quisiera que me hubieran derribado un brazo,
como no fuera el de la espada; porque te hago saber, Sancho, que la boca
sin muelas es como molino sin piedra, y en mucho más se ha de estimar un
diente que un diamante. Mas a todo esto estamos sujetos los que profesamos
la estrecha orden de la caballería. Sube, amigo, y guía, que yo te seguiré
al paso que quisieres.

Hízolo así Sancho, y encaminóse hacia donde le pareció que podía hallar
acogimiento, sin salir del camino real, que por allí iba muy seguido.
Yéndose, pues, poco a poco, porque el dolor de las quijadas de don Quijote
no le dejaba sosegar ni atender a darse priesa, quiso Sancho entretenelle y
divertille diciéndole alguna cosa; y, entre otras que le dijo, fue lo que
se dirá en el siguiente capítulo.





Capítulo XIX. De las discretas razones que Sancho pasaba con su amo, y de
la aventura que le sucedió con un cuerpo muerto, con otros acontecimientos
famosos


-Paréceme, señor mío, que todas estas desventuras que estos días nos han
sucedido, sin duda alguna han sido pena del pecado cometido por vuestra
merced contra la orden de su caballería, no habiendo cumplido el juramento
que hizo de no comer pan a manteles ni con la reina folgar, con todo
aquello que a esto se sigue y vuestra merced juró de cumplir, hasta quitar
aquel almete de Malandrino, o como se llama el moro, que no me acuerdo
bien.

-Tienes mucha razón, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-; mas, para decirte verdad,
ello se me había pasado de la memoria; y también puedes tener por cierto
que por la culpa de no habérmelo tú acordado en tiempo te sucedió aquello
de la manta; pero yo haré la enmienda, que modos hay de composición en la
orden de la caballería para todo.

-Pues, ¿juré yo algo, por dicha? -respondió Sancho.

-No importa que no hayas jurado -dijo don Quijote-: basta que yo entiendo
que de participantes no estás muy seguro, y, por sí o por no, no será malo
proveernos de remedio.

-Pues si ello es así -dijo Sancho-, mire vuestra merced no se le torne a
olvidar esto, como lo del juramento; quizá les volverá la gana a las
fantasmas de solazarse otra vez conmigo, y aun con vuestra merced si le ven
tan pertinaz.

En estas y otras pláticas les tomó la noche en mitad del camino, sin tener
ni descubrir donde aquella noche se recogiesen; y lo que no había de bueno
en ello era que perecían de hambre; que, con la falta de las alforjas, les
faltó toda la despensa y matalotaje. Y, para acabar de confirmar esta
desgracia, les sucedió una aventura que, sin artificio alguno,
verdaderamente lo parecía. Y fue que la noche cerró con alguna escuridad;
pero, con todo esto, caminaban, creyendo Sancho que, pues aquel camino era
real, a una o dos leguas, de buena razón, hallaría en él alguna venta.
Yendo, pues, desta manera, la noche escura, el escudero hambriento y el amo
con gana de comer, vieron que por el mesmo camino que iban venían hacia
ellos gran multitud de lumbres, que no parecían sino estrellas que se
movían. Pasmóse Sancho en viéndolas, y don Quijote no las tuvo todas
consigo; tiró el uno del cabestro a su asno, y el otro de las riendas a su
rocino, y estuvieron quedos, mirando atentamente lo que podía ser aquello,
y vieron que las lumbres se iban acercando a ellos, y mientras más se
llegaban, mayores parecían; a cuya vista Sancho comenzó a temblar como un
azogado, y los cabellos de la cabeza se le erizaron a don Quijote; el cual,
animándose un poco, dijo:

-Ésta, sin duda, Sancho, debe de ser grandísima y peligrosísima aventura,
donde será necesario que yo muestre todo mi valor y esfuerzo.
-¡Desdichado de mí! -respondió Sancho-; si acaso esta aventura fuese de
fantasmas, como me lo va pareciendo, ¿adónde habrá costillas que la sufran?
-Por más fantasmas que sean -dijo don Quijote-, no consentiré yo que te
toque en el pelo de la ropa; que si la otra vez se burlaron contigo, fue
porque no pude yo saltar las paredes del corral, pero ahora estamos en
campo raso, donde podré yo como quisiere esgremir mi espada.

-Y si le encantan y entomecen, como la otra vez lo hicieron -dijo Sancho-,
¿qué aprovechará estar en campo abierto o no?

-Con todo eso -replicó don Quijote-, te ruego, Sancho, que tengas buen
ánimo, que la experiencia te dará a entender el que yo tengo.

-Sí tendré, si a Dios place -respondió Sancho.

Y, apartándose los dos a un lado del camino, tornaron a mirar atentamente
lo que aquello de aquellas lumbres que caminaban podía ser; y de allí a muy
poco descubrieron muchos encamisados, cuya temerosa visión de todo punto
remató el ánimo de Sancho Panza, el cual comenzó a dar diente con diente,
como quien tiene frío de cuartana; y creció más el batir y dentellear
cuando distintamente vieron lo que era, porque descubrieron hasta veinte
encamisados, todos a caballo, con sus hachas encendidas en las manos;
detrás de los cuales venía una litera cubierta de luto, a la cual seguían
otros seis de a caballo, enlutados hasta los pies de las mulas; que bien
vieron que no eran caballos en el sosiego con que caminaban. Iban los
encamisados murmurando entre sí, con una voz baja y compasiva. Esta estraña
visión, a tales horas y en tal despoblado, bien bastaba para poner miedo en
el corazón de Sancho, y aun en el de su amo; y así fuera en cuanto a don
Quijote, que ya Sancho había dado al través con todo su esfuerzo. Lo
contrario le avino a su amo, al cual en aquel punto se le representó en su
imaginación al vivo que aquélla era una de las aventuras de sus libros.
Figurósele que la litera eran andas donde debía de ir algún mal ferido o
muerto caballero, cuya venganza a él solo estaba reservada; y, sin hacer
otro discurso, enristró su lanzón, púsose bien en la silla, y con gentil
brío y continente se puso en la mitad del camino por donde los encamisados
forzosamente habían de pasar, y cuando los vio cerca alzó la voz y dijo:
-Deteneos, caballeros, o quienquiera que seáis, y dadme cuenta de quién
sois, de dónde venís, adónde vais, qué es lo que en aquellas andas lleváis;
que, según las muestras, o vosotros habéis fecho, o vos han fecho, algún
desaguisado, y conviene y es menester que yo lo sepa, o bien para
castigaros del mal que fecistes, o bien para vengaros del tuerto que vos
ficieron.

-Vamos de priesa -respondió uno de los encamisados- y está la venta lejos,
y no nos podemos detener a dar tanta cuenta como pedís.

Y, picando la mula, pasó adelante. Sintióse desta respuesta grandemente don
Quijote, y, trabando del freno, dijo:

-Deteneos y sed más bien criado, y dadme cuenta de lo que os he preguntado;
si no, conmigo sois todos en batalla.

Era la mula asombradiza, y al tomarla del freno se espantó de manera que,
alzándose en los pies, dio con su dueño por las ancas en el suelo. Un mozo
que iba a pie, viendo caer al encamisado, comenzó a denostar a don Quijote,
el cual, ya encolerizado, sin esperar más, enristrando su lanzón, arremetió
a uno de los enlutados, y, mal ferido, dio con él en tierra; y,
revolviéndose por los demás, era cosa de ver con la presteza que los
acometía y desbarataba; que no parecía sino que en aquel instante le habían
nacido alas a Rocinante, según andaba de ligero y orgulloso.

Todos los encamisados era gente medrosa y sin armas, y así, con facilidad,
en un momento dejaron la refriega y comenzaron a correr por aquel campo con
las hachas encendidas, que no parecían sino a los de las máscaras que en
noche de regocijo y fiesta corren. Los enlutados, asimesmo, revueltos y
envueltos en sus faldamentos y lobas, no se podían mover; así que, muy a su
salvo, don Quijote los apaleó a todos y les hizo dejar el sitio mal de su
grado, porque todos pensaron que aquél no era hombre, sino diablo del
infierno que les salía a quitar el cuerpo muerto que en la litera llevaban.
Todo lo miraba Sancho, admirado del ardimiento de su señor, y decía entre
sí:

-Sin duda este mi amo es tan valiente y esforzado como él dice.

Estaba una hacha ardiendo en el suelo, junto al primero que derribó la
mula, a cuya luz le pudo ver don Quijote; y, llegándose a él, le puso la
punta del lanzón en el rostro, diciéndole que se rindiese; si no, que le
mataría. A lo cual respondió el caído:

-Harto rendido estoy, pues no me puedo mover, que tengo una pierna
quebrada; suplico a vuestra merced, si es caballero cristiano, que no me
mate; que cometerá un gran sacrilegio, que soy licenciado y tengo las
primeras órdenes.

-Pues, ¿quién diablos os ha traído aquí -dijo don Quijote-, siendo hombre
de Iglesia?

-¿Quién, señor? -replicó el caído-: mi desventura.

-Pues otra mayor os amenaza -dijo don Quijote-, si no me satisfacéis a todo
cuanto primero os pregunté.

-Con facilidad será vuestra merced satisfecho -respondió el licenciado-; y
así, sabrá vuestra merced que, aunque denantes dije que yo era licenciado,
no soy sino bachiller, y llámome Alonso López; soy natural de Alcobendas;
vengo de la ciudad de Baeza con otros once sacerdotes, que son los que
huyeron con las hachas; vamos a la ciudad de Segovia acompañando un cuerpo
muerto, que va en aquella litera, que es de un caballero que murió en
Baeza, donde fue depositado; y ahora, como digo, llevábamos sus huesos a su
sepultura, que está en Segovia, de donde es natural.

-¿Y quién le mató? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Dios, por medio de unas calenturas pestilentes que le dieron -respondió el
bachiller.

-Desa suerte -dijo don Quijote-, quitado me ha Nuestro Señor del trabajo
que había de tomar en vengar su muerte si otro alguno le hubiera muerto;
pero, habiéndole muerto quien le mató, no hay sino callar y encoger los
hombros, porque lo mesmo hiciera si a mí mismo me matara. Y quiero que sepa
vuestra reverencia que yo soy un caballero de la Mancha, llamado don
Quijote, y es mi oficio y ejercicio andar por el mundo enderezando tuertos
y desfaciendo agravios.

-No sé cómo pueda ser eso de enderezar tuertos -dijo el bachiller-, pues a
mí de derecho me habéis vuelto tuerto, dejándome una pierna quebrada, la
cual no se verá derecha en todos los días de su vida; y el agravio que en
mí habéis deshecho ha sido dejarme agraviado de manera que me quedaré
agraviado para siempre; y harta desventura ha sido topar con vos, que vais
buscando aventuras.

-No todas las cosas -respondió don Quijote- suceden de un mismo modo. El
daño estuvo, señor bachiller Alonso López, en venir, como veníades, de
noche, vestidos con aquellas sobrepellices, con las hachas encendidas,
rezando, cubiertos de luto, que propiamente semejábades cosa mala y del
otro mundo; y así, yo no pude dejar de cumplir con mi obligación
acometiéndoos, y os acometiera aunque verdaderamente supiera que érades los
memos satanases del infierno, que por tales os juzgué y tuve siempre.
-Ya que así lo ha querido mi suerte -dijo el bachiller-, suplico a vuestra
merced, señor caballero andante (que tan mala andanza me ha dado), me ayude
a salir de debajo desta mula, que me tiene tomada una pierna entre el
estribo y la silla.

-¡Hablara yo para mañana! -dijo don Quijote-. Y ¿hasta cuándo aguardábades
a decirme vuestro afán?

Dio luego voces a Sancho Panza que viniese; pero él no se curó de venir,
porque andaba ocupado desvalijando una acémila de repuesto que traían
aquellos buenos señores, bien bastecida de cosas de comer. Hizo Sancho
costal de su gabán, y, recogiendo todo lo que pudo y cupo en el talego,
cargó su jumento, y luego acudió a las voces de su amo y ayudó a sacar al
señor bachiller de la opresión de la mula; y, poniéndole encima della, le
dio la hacha, y don Quijote le dijo que siguiese la derrota de sus
compañeros, a quien de su parte pidiese perdón del agravio, que no había
sido en su mano dejar de haberle hecho. Díjole también Sancho:

-Si acaso quisieren saber esos señores quién ha sido el valeroso que tales
los puso, diráles vuestra merced que es el famoso don Quijote de la Mancha,
que por otro nombre se llama el Caballero de la Triste Figura.

Con esto, se fue el bachiller; y don Quijote preguntó a Sancho que qué le
había movido a llamarle el Caballero de la Triste Figura, más entonces que
nunca.

-Yo se lo diré -respondió Sancho-: porque le he estado mirando un rato a la
luz de aquella hacha que lleva aquel malandante, y verdaderamente tiene
vuestra merced la más mala figura, de poco acá, que jamás he visto; y
débelo de haber causado, o ya el cansancio deste combate, o ya la falta de
las muelas y dientes.

-No es eso -respondió don Quijote-, sino que el sabio, a cuyo cargo debe de
estar el escribir la historia de mis hazañas, le habrá parecido que será
bien que yo tome algún nombre apelativo, como lo tomaban todos los
caballeros pasados: cuál se llamaba el de la Ardiente Espada; cuál, el del
Unicornio; aquel, de las Doncellas; aquéste, el del Ave Fénix; el otro, el
Caballero del Grifo; estotro, el de la Muerte; y por estos nombres e
insignias eran conocidos por toda la redondez de la tierra. Y así, digo que
el sabio ya dicho te habrá puesto en la lengua y en el pensamiento ahora
que me llamases el Caballero de la Triste Figura, como pienso llamarme
desde hoy en adelante; y, para que mejor me cuadre tal nombre, determino de
hacer pintar, cuando haya lugar, en mi escudo una muy triste figura.
-No hay para qué gastar tiempo y dineros en hacer esa figura -dijo Sancho-,
sino lo que se ha de hacer es que vuestra merced descubra la suya y dé
rostro a los que le miraren; que, sin más ni más, y sin otra imagen ni
escudo, le llamarán el de la Triste Figura; y créame que le digo verdad,
porque le prometo a vuestra merced, señor, y esto sea dicho en burlas, que
le hace tan mala cara la hambre y la falta de las muelas, que, como ya
tengo dicho, se podrá muy bien escusar la triste pintura.

Rióse don Quijote del donaire de Sancho, pero, con todo, propuso de
llamarse de aquel nombre en pudiendo pintar su escudo, o rodela, como había
imaginado.

En esto volvió el bachiller y le dijo a don Quijote:

-Olvidábaseme de decir que advierta vuestra merced que queda descomulgado
por haber puesto las manos violentamente en cosa sagrada: juxta illud: Si
quis suadente diabolo, etc.

-No entiendo ese latín -respondió don Quijote-, mas yo sé bien que no puse
las manos, sino este lanzón; cuanto más, que yo no pensé que ofendía a
sacerdotes ni a cosas de la Iglesia, a quien respeto y adoro como católico
y fiel cristiano que soy, sino a fantasmas y a vestiglos del otro mundo; y,
cuando eso así fuese, en la memoria tengo lo que le pasó al Cid Ruy Díaz,
cuando quebró la silla del embajador de aquel rey delante de Su Santidad
del Papa, por lo cual lo descomulgó, y anduvo aquel día el buen Rodrigo de
Vivar como muy honrado y valiente caballero.

En oyendo esto el bachiller, se fue, como queda dicho, sin replicarle
palabra. Quisiera don Quijote mirar si el cuerpo que venía en la litera
eran huesos o no, pero no lo consintió Sancho, diciéndole:

-Señor, vuestra merced ha acabado esta peligrosa aventura lo más a su salvo
de todas las que yo he visto; esta gente, aunque vencida y desbaratada,
podría ser que cayese en la cuenta de que los venció sola una persona, y,
corridos y avergonzados desto, volviesen a rehacerse y a buscarnos, y nos
diesen en qué entender. El jumento está como conviene, la montaña cerca, la
hambre carga, no hay que hacer sino retirarnos con gentil compás de pies,
y, como dicen, váyase el muerto a la sepultura y el vivo a la hogaza.
Y, antecogiendo su asno, rogó a su señor que le siguiese; el cual,
pareciéndole que Sancho tenía razón, sin volverle a replicar, le siguió. Y,
a poco trecho que caminaban por entre dos montañuelas, se hallaron en un
espacioso y escondido valle, donde se apearon; y Sancho alivió el jumento,
y, tendidos sobre la verde yerba, con la salsa de su hambre, almorzaron,
comieron, merendaron y cenaron a un mesmo punto, satisfaciendo sus
estómagos con más de una fiambrera que los señores clérigos del difunto
-que pocas veces se dejan mal pasar- en la acémila de su repuesto traían.
Mas sucedióles otra desgracia, que Sancho la tuvo por la peor de todas, y
fue que no tenían vino que beber, ni aun agua que llegar a la boca; y,
acosados de la sed, dijo Sancho, viendo que el prado donde estaban estaba
colmado de verde y menuda yerba, lo que se dirá en el siguiente capítulo.





Capítulo XX. De la jamás vista ni oída aventura que con más poco peligro
fue acabada de famoso caballero en el mundo, como la que acabó el valeroso
don Quijote de la Mancha


-No es posible, señor mío, sino que estas yerbas dan testimonio de que por
aquí cerca debe de estar alguna fuente o arroyo que estas yerbas humedece;
y así, será bien que vamos un poco más adelante, que ya toparemos donde
podamos mitigar esta terrible sed que nos fatiga, que, sin duda, causa
mayor pena que la hambre.

Parecióle bien el consejo a don Quijote, y, tomando de la rienda a
Rocinante, y Sancho del cabestro a su asno, después de haber puesto sobre
él los relieves que de la cena quedaron, comenzaron a caminar por el prado
arriba a tiento, porque la escuridad de la noche no les dejaba ver cosa
alguna; mas, no hubieron andado docientos pasos, cuando llegó a sus oídos
un grande ruido de agua, como que de algunos grandes y levantados riscos se
despeñaba. Alegróles el ruido en gran manera, y, parándose a escuchar hacia
qué parte sonaba, oyeron a deshora otro estruendo que les aguó el contento
del agua, especialmente a Sancho, que naturalmente era medroso y de poco
ánimo. Digo que oyeron que daban unos golpes a compás, con un cierto crujir
de hierros y cadenas, que, acompañados del furioso estruendo del agua, que
pusieran pavor a cualquier otro corazón que no fuera el de don Quijote.
Era la noche, como se ha dicho, escura, y ellos acertaron a entrar entre
unos árboles altos, cuyas hojas, movidas del blando viento, hacían un
temeroso y manso ruido; de manera que la soledad, el sitio, la escuridad,
el ruido del agua con el susurro de las hojas, todo causaba horror y
espanto, y más cuando vieron que ni los golpes cesaban, ni el viento
dormía, ni la mañana llegaba; añadiéndose a todo esto el ignorar el lugar
donde se hallaban. Pero don Quijote, acompañado de su intrépido corazón,
saltó sobre Rocinante, y, embrazando su rodela, terció su lanzón y dijo:
-Sancho amigo, has de saber que yo nací, por querer del cielo, en esta
nuestra edad de hierro, para resucitar en ella la de oro, o la dorada, como
suele llamarse. Yo soy aquél para quien están guardados los peligros, las
grandes hazañas, los valerosos hechos. Yo soy, digo otra vez, quien ha de
resucitar los de la Tabla Redonda, los Doce de Francia y los Nueve de la
Fama, y el que ha de poner en olvido los Platires, los Tablantes, Olivantes
y Tirantes, los Febos y Belianises, con toda la caterva de los famosos
caballeros andantes del pasado tiempo, haciendo en este en que me hallo
tales grandezas, estrañezas y fechos de armas, que escurezcan las más
claras que ellos ficieron. Bien notas, escudero fiel y legal, las tinieblas
desta noche, su estraño silencio, el sordo y confuso estruendo destos
árboles, el temeroso ruido de aquella agua en cuya busca venimos, que
parece que se despeña y derrumba desde los altos montes de la luna, y
aquel incesable golpear que nos hiere y lastima los oídos; las cuales
cosas, todas juntas y cada una por sí, son bastantes a infundir miedo,
temor y espanto en el pecho del mesmo Marte, cuanto más en aquel que no
está acostumbrado a semejantes acontecimientos y aventuras. Pues todo esto
que yo te pinto son incentivos y despertadores de mi ánimo, que ya hace que
el corazón me reviente en el pecho, con el deseo que tiene de acometer esta
aventura, por más dificultosa que se muestra. Así que, aprieta un poco las
cinchas a Rocinante y quédate a Dios, y espérame aquí hasta tres días no
más, en los cuales, si no volviere, puedes tú volverte a nuestra aldea, y
desde allí, por hacerme merced y buena obra, irás al Toboso, donde dirás a
la incomparable señora mía Dulcinea que su cautivo caballero murió por
acometer cosas que le hiciesen digno de poder llamarse suyo.

Cuando Sancho oyó las palabras de su amo, comenzó a llorar con la mayor
ternura del mundo y a decille:

-Señor, yo no sé por qué quiere vuestra merced acometer esta tan temerosa
aventura: ahora es de noche, aquí no nos vee nadie, bien podemos torcer el
camino y desviarnos del peligro, aunque no bebamos en tres días; y, pues no
hay quien nos vea, menos habrá quien nos note de cobardes; cuanto más, que
yo he oído predicar al cura de nuestro lugar, que vuestra merced bien
conoce, que quien busca el peligro perece en él; así que, no es bien tentar
a Dios acometiendo tan desaforado hecho, donde no se puede escapar sino por
milagro; y basta los que ha hecho el cielo con vuestra merced en librarle
de ser manteado, como yo lo fui, y en sacarle vencedor, libre y salvo de
entre tantos enemigos como acompañaban al difunto. Y, cuando todo esto no
mueva ni ablande ese duro corazón, muévale el pensar y creer que apenas se
habrá vuestra merced apartado de aquí, cuando yo, de miedo, dé mi ánima a
quien quisiere llevarla. Yo salí de mi tierra y dejé hijos y mujer por
venir a servir a vuestra merced, creyendo valer más y no menos; pero, como
la cudicia rompe el saco, a mí me ha rasgado mis esperanzas, pues cuando
más vivas las tenía de alcanzar aquella negra y malhadada ínsula que tantas
veces vuestra merced me ha prometido, veo que, en pago y trueco della, me
quiere ahora dejar en un lugar tan apartado del trato humano. Por un solo
Dios, señor mío, que non se me faga tal desaguisado; y ya que del todo no
quiera vuestra merced desistir de acometer este fecho, dilátelo, a lo
menos, hasta la mañana; que, a lo que a mí me muestra la ciencia que
aprendí cuando era pastor, no debe de haber desde aquí al alba tres horas,
porque la boca de la Bocina está encima de la cabeza, y hace la media noche
en la línea del brazo izquierdo.

-¿Cómo puedes tú, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, ver dónde hace esa línea, ni
dónde está esa boca o ese colodrillo que dices, si hace la noche tan escura
que no parece en todo el cielo estrella alguna?

-Así es -dijo Sancho-, pero tiene el miedo muchos ojos y vee las cosas
debajo de tierra, cuanto más encima en el cielo; puesto que, por buen
discurso, bien se puede entender que hay poco de aquí al día.

-Falte lo que faltare -respondió don Quijote-; que no se ha de decir por
mí, ahora ni en ningún tiempo, que lágrimas y ruegos me apartaron de hacer
lo que debía a estilo de caballero; y así, te ruego, Sancho, que calles;
que Dios, que me ha puesto en corazón de acometer ahora esta tan no vista y
tan temerosa aventura, tendrá cuidado de mirar por mi salud y de consolar
tu tristeza. Lo que has de hacer es apretar bien las cinchas a Rocinante y
quedarte aquí, que yo daré la vuelta presto, o vivo o muerto.

Viendo, pues, Sancho la última resolución de su amo y cuán poco valían con
él sus lágrimas, consejos y ruegos, determinó de aprovecharse de su
industria y hacerle esperar hasta el día, si pudiese; y así, cuando
apretaba las cinchas al caballo, bonitamente y sin ser sentido, ató con el
cabestro de su asno ambos pies a Rocinante, de manera que cuando don
Quijote se quiso partir, no pudo, porque el caballo no se podía mover sino
a saltos. Viendo Sancho Panza el buen suceso de su embuste, dijo:

-Ea, señor, que el cielo, conmovido de mis lágrimas y plegarias, ha
ordenado que no se pueda mover Rocinante; y si vos queréis porfiar, y
espolear, y dalle, será enojar a la fortuna y dar coces, como dicen, contra
el aguijón.

Desesperábase con esto don Quijote, y, por más que ponía las piernas al
caballo, menos le podía mover; y, sin caer en la cuenta de la ligadura,
tuvo por bien de sosegarse y esperar, o a que amaneciese, o a que Rocinante
se menease, creyendo, sin duda, que aquello venía de otra parte que de la
industria de Sancho; y así, le dijo:

-Pues así es, Sancho, que Rocinante no puede moverse, yo soy contento de
esperar a que ría el alba, aunque yo llore lo que ella tardare en venir.
-No hay que llorar -respondió Sancho-, que yo entretendré a vuestra merced
contando cuentos desde aquí al día, si ya no es que se quiere apear y
echarse a dormir un poco sobre la verde yerba, a uso de caballeros
andantes, para hallarse más descansado cuando llegue el día y punto de
acometer esta tan desemejable aventura que le espera.

-¿A qué llamas apear o a qué dormir? -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Soy yo, por
ventura, de aquellos caballeros que toman reposo en los peligros? Duerme
tú, que naciste para dormir, o haz lo que quisieres, que yo haré lo que
viere que más viene con mi pretensión.

No se enoje vuestra merced, señor mío -respondió Sancho-, que no lo dije
por tanto.

Y, llegándose a él, puso la una mano en el arzón delantero y la otra en el
otro, de modo que quedó abrazado con el muslo izquierdo de su amo, sin
osarse apartar dél un dedo: tal era el miedo que tenía a los golpes, que
todavía alternativamente sonaban. Díjole don Quijote que contase algún
cuento para entretenerle, como se lo había prometido, a lo que Sancho dijo
que sí hiciera si le dejara el temor de lo que oía.

-Pero, con todo eso, yo me esforzaré a decir una historia que, si la
acierto a contar y no me van a la mano, es la mejor de las historias; y
estéme vuestra merced atento, que ya comienzo. «Érase que se era, el bien
que viniere para todos sea, y el mal, para quien lo fuere a buscar...» Y
advierta vuestra merced, señor mío, que el principio que los antiguos
dieron a sus consejas no fue así comoquiera, que fue una sentencia de Catón
Zonzorino, romano, que dice: "Y el mal, para quien le fuere a buscar", que
viene aquí como anillo al dedo, para que vuestra merced se esté quedo y no
vaya a buscar el mal a ninguna parte, sino que nos volvamos por otro
camino, pues nadie nos fuerza a que sigamos éste, donde tantos miedos nos
sobresaltan.

-Sigue tu cuento, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, y del camino que hemos de
seguir déjame a mí el cuidado.

-«Digo, pues -prosiguió Sancho-, que en un lugar de Estremadura había un
pastor cabrerizo (quiero decir que guardaba cabras), el cual pastor o
cabrerizo, como digo, de mi cuento, se llamaba Lope Ruiz; y este Lope Ruiz
andaba enamorado de una pastora que se llamaba Torralba, la cual pastora
llamada Torralba era hija de un ganadero rico, y este ganadero rico...»
-Si desa manera cuentas tu cuento, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, repitiendo
dos veces lo que vas diciendo, no acabarás en dos días; dilo seguidamente y
cuéntalo como hombre de entendimiento, y si no, no digas nada.

-De la misma manera que yo lo cuento -respondió Sancho-, se cuentan en mi
tierra todas las consejas, y yo no sé contarlo de otra, ni es bien que
vuestra merced me pida que haga usos nuevos.

-Di como quisieres -respondió don Quijote-; que, pues la suerte quiere que
no pueda dejar de escucharte, prosigue.

-«Así que, señor mío de mi ánima -prosiguió Sancho-, que, como ya tengo
dicho, este pastor andaba enamorado de Torralba, la pastora, que era una
moza rolliza, zahareña y tiraba algo a hombruna, porque tenía unos pocos de
bigotes, que parece que ahora la veo.»

-Luego, ¿conocístela tú? -dijo don Quijote.

-No la conocí yo -respondió Sancho-, pero quien me contó este cuento me
dijo que era tan cierto y verdadero que podía bien, cuando lo contase a
otro, afirmar y jurar que lo había visto todo. «Así que, yendo días y
viniendo días, el diablo, que no duerme y que todo lo añasca, hizo de
manera que el amor que el pastor tenía a la pastora se volviese en omecillo
y mala voluntad; y la causa fue, según malas lenguas, una cierta cantidad
de celillos que ella le dio, tales que pasaban de la raya y llegaban a lo
vedado; y fue tanto lo que el pastor la aborreció de allí adelante que, por
no verla, se quiso ausentar de aquella tierra e irse donde sus ojos no la
viesen jamás. La Torralba, que se vio desdeñada del Lope, luego le quiso
bien, mas que nunca le había querido.»

-Ésa es natural condición de mujeres -dijo don Quijote-: desdeñar a quien
las quiere y amar a quien las aborrece. Pasa adelante, Sancho.
-«Sucedió -dijo Sancho- que el pastor puso por obra su determinación, y,
antecogiendo sus cabras, se encaminó por los campos de Estremadura, para
pasarse a los reinos de Portugal. La Torralba, que lo supo, se fue tras él,
y seguíale a pie y descalza desde lejos, con un bordón en la mano y con
unas alforjas al cuello, donde llevaba, según es fama, un pedazo de espejo
y otro de un peine, y no sé qué botecillo de mudas para la cara; mas,
llevase lo que llevase, que yo no me quiero meter ahora en averiguallo,
sólo diré que dicen que el pastor llegó con su ganado a pasar el río
Guadiana, y en aquella sazón iba crecido y casi fuera de madre, y por la
parte que llegó no había barca ni barco, ni quien le pasase a él ni a su
ganado de la otra parte, de lo que se congojó mucho, porque veía que la
Torralba venía ya muy cerca y le había de dar mucha pesadumbre con sus
ruegos y lágrimas; mas, tanto anduvo mirando, que vio un pescador que tenía
junto a sí un barco, tan pequeño que solamente podían caber en él una
persona y una cabra; y, con todo esto, le habló y concertó con él que le
pasase a él y a trecientas cabras que llevaba. Entró el pescador en el
barco, y pasó una cabra; volvió, y pasó otra; tornó a volver, y tornó a
pasar otra.» Tenga vuestra merced cuenta en las cabras que el pescador va
pasando, porque si se pierde una de la memoria, se acabará el cuento y no
será posible contar más palabra dél. «Sigo, pues, y digo que el
desembarcadero de la otra parte estaba lleno de cieno y resbaloso, y
tardaba el pescador mucho tiempo en ir y volver. Con todo esto, volvió por
otra cabra, y otra, y otra...»

-Haz cuenta que las pasó todas -dijo don Quijote-: no andes yendo y
viniendo desa manera, que no acabarás de pasarlas en un año.

-¿Cuántas han pasado hasta agora? -dijo Sancho.

-¡Yo qué diablos sé! -respondió don Quijote-.

-He ahí lo que yo dije: que tuviese buena cuenta. Pues, por Dios, que se ha
acabado el cuento, que no hay pasar adelante.

-¿Cómo puede ser eso? -respondió don Quijote-. ¿Tan de esencia de la
historia es saber las cabras que han pasado, por estenso, que si se yerra
una del número no puedes seguir adelante con la historia?

-No señor, en ninguna manera -respondió Sancho-; porque, así como yo
pregunté a vuestra merced que me dijese cuántas cabras habían pasado y me
respondió que no sabía, en aquel mesmo instante se me fue a mí de la
memoria cuanto me quedaba por decir, y a fe que era de mucha virtud y
contento.

-¿De modo -dijo don Quijote- que ya la historia es acabada?

-Tan acabada es como mi madre -dijo Sancho.

-Dígote de verdad -respondió don Quijote- que tú has contado una de las más
nuevas consejas, cuento o historia, que nadie pudo pensar en el mundo; y
que tal modo de contarla ni dejarla, jamás se podrá ver ni habrá visto en
toda la vida, aunque no esperaba yo otra cosa de tu buen discurso; mas no
me maravillo, pues quizá estos golpes, que no cesan, te deben de tener
turbado el entendimiento.

-Todo puede ser -respondió Sancho-, mas yo sé que en lo de mi cuento no hay
más que decir: que allí se acaba do comienza el yerro de la cuenta del
pasaje de las cabras.

-Acabe norabuena donde quisiere -dijo don Quijote-, y veamos si se puede
mover Rocinante.

Tornóle a poner las piernas, y él tornó a dar saltos y a estarse quedo:
tanto estaba de bien atado.

En esto, parece ser, o que el frío de la mañana, que ya venía, o que Sancho
hubiese cenado algunas cosas lenitivas, o que fuese cosa natural -que es lo
que más se debe creer-, a él le vino en voluntad y deseo de hacer lo que
otro no pudiera hacer por él; mas era tanto el miedo que había entrado en
su corazón, que no osaba apartarse un negro de uña de su amo. Pues pensar
de no hacer lo que tenía gana, tampoco era posible; y así, lo que hizo, por
bien de paz, fue soltar la mano derecha, que tenía asida al arzón trasero,
con la cual, bonitamente y sin rumor alguno, se soltó la lazada corrediza
con que los calzones se sostenían, sin ayuda de otra alguna, y, en
quitándosela, dieron luego abajo y se le quedaron como grillos. Tras esto,
alzó la camisa lo mejor que pudo y echó al aire entrambas posaderas, que no
eran muy pequeñas. Hecho esto -que él pensó que era lo más que tenía que
hacer para salir de aquel terrible aprieto y angustia-, le sobrevino otra
mayor, que fue que le pareció que no podía mudarse sin hacer estrépito y
ruido, y comenzó a apretar los dientes y a encoger los hombros, recogiendo
en sí el aliento todo cuanto podía; pero, con todas estas diligencias, fue
tan desdichado que, al cabo al cabo, vino a hacer un poco de ruido, bien
diferente de aquel que a él le ponía tanto miedo. Oyólo don Quijote y dijo:
-¿Qué rumor es ése, Sancho?

-No sé, señor -respondió él-. Alguna cosa nueva debe de ser, que las
aventuras y desventuras nunca comienzan por poco.

Tornó otra vez a probar ventura, y sucedióle tan bien que, sin más ruido ni
alboroto que el pasado, se halló libre de la carga que tanta pesadumbre le
había dado. Mas, como don Quijote tenía el sentido del olfato tan vivo como
el de los oídos, y Sancho estaba tan junto y cosido con él que casi por
línea recta subían los vapores hacia arriba, no se pudo escusar de que
algunos no llegasen a sus narices; y, apenas hubieron llegado, cuando él
fue al socorro, apretándolas entre los dos dedos; y, con tono algo gangoso,
dijo:

-Paréceme, Sancho, que tienes mucho miedo.

-Sí tengo -respondió Sancho-; mas, ¿en qué lo echa de ver vuestra merced
ahora más que nunca?

-En que ahora más que nunca hueles, y no a ámbar -respondió don Quijote.
-Bien podrá ser -dijo Sancho-, mas yo no tengo la culpa, sino vuestra
merced, que me trae a deshoras y por estos no acostumbrados pasos.
-Retírate tres o cuatro allá, amigo -dijo don Quijote (todo esto sin
quitarse los dedos de las narices)-, y desde aquí adelante ten más cuenta
con tu persona y con lo que debes a la mía; que la mucha conversación que
tengo contigo ha engendrado este menosprecio.

-Apostaré -replicó Sancho- que piensa vuestra merced que yo he hecho de mi
persona alguna cosa que no deba.

-Peor es meneallo, amigo Sancho -respondió don Quijote.

En estos coloquios y otros semejantes pasaron la noche amo y mozo. Mas,
viendo Sancho que a más andar se venía la mañana, con mucho tiento desligó
a Rocinante y se ató los calzones. Como Rocinante se vio libre, aunque él
de suyo no era nada brioso, parece que se resintió, y comenzó a dar
manotadas; porque corvetas -con perdón suyo- no las sabía hacer. Viendo,
pues, don Quijote que ya Rocinante se movía, lo tuvo a buena señal, y creyó
que lo era de que acometiese aquella temerosa aventura.

Acabó en esto de descubrirse el alba y de parecer distintamente las cosas,
y vio don Quijote que estaba entre unos árboles altos, que ellos eran
castaños, que hacen la sombra muy escura. Sintió también que el golpear no
cesaba, pero no vio quién lo podía causar; y así, sin más detenerse, hizo
sentir las espuelas a Rocinante, y, tornando a despedirse de Sancho, le
mandó que allí le aguardase tres días, a lo más largo, como ya otra vez se
lo había dicho; y que, si al cabo dellos no hubiese vuelto, tuviese por
cierto que Dios había sido servido de que en aquella peligrosa aventura se
le acabasen sus días. Tornóle a referir el recado y embajada que había de
llevar de su parte a su señora Dulcinea, y que, en lo que tocaba a la paga
de sus servicios, no tuviese pena, porque él había dejado hecho su
testamento antes que saliera de su lugar, donde se hallaría gratificado de
todo lo tocante a su salario, rata por cantidad, del tiempo que hubiese
servido; pero que si Dios le sacaba de aquel peligro sano y salvo y sin
cautela, se podía tener por muy más que cierta la prometida ínsula.

De nuevo tornó a llorar Sancho, oyendo de nuevo las lastimeras razones de
su buen señor, y determinó de no dejarle hasta el último tránsito y fin de
aquel negocio.

Destas lágrimas y determinación tan honrada de Sancho Panza saca el autor
desta historia que debía de ser bien nacido, y, por lo menos, cristiano
viejo. Cuyo sentimiento enterneció algo a su amo, pero no tanto que
mostrase flaqueza alguna; antes, disimulando lo mejor que pudo, comenzó a
caminar hacia la parte por donde le pareció que el ruido del agua y del
golpear venía.

Seguíale Sancho a pie, llevando, como tenía de costumbre, del cabestro a su
jumento, perpetuo compañero de sus prósperas y adversas fortunas; y,
habiendo andado una buena pieza por entre aquellos castaños y árboles
sombríos, dieron en un pradecillo que al pie de unas altas peñas se hacía,
de las cuales se precipitaba un grandísimo golpe de agua. Al pie de las
peñas, estaban unas casas mal hechas, que más parecían ruinas de edificios
que casas, de entre las cuales advirtieron que salía el ruido y estruendo
de aquel golpear, que aún no cesaba.

Alborotóse Rocinante con el estruendo del agua y de los golpes, y,
sosegándole don Quijote, se fue llegando poco a poco a las casas,
encomendándose de todo corazón a su señora, suplicándole que en aquella
temerosa jornada y empresa le favoreciese, y de camino se encomendaba
también a Dios, que no le olvidase. No se le quitaba Sancho del lado, el
cual alargaba cuanto podía el cuello y la vista por entre las piernas de
Rocinante, por ver si vería ya lo que tan suspenso y medroso le tenía.
Otros cien pasos serían los que anduvieron, cuando, al doblar de una punta,
pareció descubierta y patente la misma causa, sin que pudiese ser otra, de
aquel horrísono y para ellos espantable ruido, que tan suspensos y medrosos
toda la noche los había tenido. Y eran -si no lo has, ¡oh lector!, por
pesadumbre y enojo- seis mazos de batán, que con sus alternativos golpes
aquel estruendo formaban.

Cuando don Quijote vio lo que era, enmudeció y pasmóse de arriba abajo.
Miróle Sancho, y vio que tenía la cabeza inclinada sobre el pecho, con
muestras de estar corrido. Miró también don Quijote a Sancho, y viole que
tenía los carrillos hinchados y la boca llena de risa, con evidentes
señales de querer reventar con ella, y no pudo su melanconía tanto con él
que, a la vista de Sancho, pudiese dejar de reírse; y, como vio Sancho que
su amo había comenzado, soltó la presa de manera que tuvo necesidad de
apretarse las ijadas con los puños, por no reventar riendo. Cuatro veces
sosegó, y otras tantas volvió a su risa con el mismo ímpetu que primero; de
lo cual ya se daba al diablo don Quijote, y más cuando le oyó decir, como
por modo de fisga:

-«Has de saber, ¡oh Sancho amigo!, que yo nací, por querer del cielo, en
esta nuestra edad de hierro, para resucitar en ella la dorada, o de oro. Yo
soy aquél para quien están guardados los peligros, las hazañas grandes, los
valerosos fechos...»

Y por aquí fue repitiendo todas o las más razones que don Quijote dijo la
vez primera que oyeron los temerosos golpes.

Viendo, pues, don Quijote que Sancho hacía burla dél, se corrió y enojó en
tanta manera, que alzó el lanzón y le asentó dos palos, tales que, si, como
los recibió en las espaldas, los recibiera en la cabeza, quedara libre de
pagarle el salario, si no fuera a sus herederos. Viendo Sancho que sacaba
tan malas veras de sus burlas, con temor de que su amo no pasase adelante
en ellas, con mucha humildad le dijo:

-Sosiéguese vuestra merced; que, por Dios, que me burlo.

-Pues, porque os burláis, no me burlo yo -respondió don Quijote-. Venid
acá, señor alegre: ¿paréceos a vos que, si como éstos fueron mazos de
batán, fueran otra peligrosa aventura, no había yo mostrado el ánimo que
convenía para emprendella y acaballa? ¿Estoy yo obligado, a dicha, siendo,
como soy, caballero, a conocer y destinguir los sones y saber cuáles son de
batán o no? Y más, que podría ser, como es verdad, que no los he visto en
mi vida, como vos los habréis visto, como villano ruin que sois, criado y
nacido entre ellos. Si no, haced vos que estos seis mazos se vuelvan en
seis jayanes, y echádmelos a las barbas uno a uno, o todos juntos, y,
cuando yo no diere con todos patas arriba, haced de mí la burla que
quisiéredes.

-No haya más, señor mío -replicó Sancho-, que yo confieso que he andado
algo risueño en demasía. Pero dígame vuestra merced, ahora que estamos en
paz (así Dios le saque de todas las aventuras que le sucedieren tan sano y
salvo como le ha sacado désta), ¿no ha sido cosa de reír, y lo es de
contar, el gran miedo que hemos tenido? A lo menos, el que yo tuve; que de
vuestra merced ya yo sé que no le conoce, ni sabe qué es temor ni espanto.
-No niego yo -respondió don Quijote- que lo que nos ha sucedido no sea cosa
digna de risa, pero no es digna de contarse; que no son todas las personas
tan discretas que sepan poner en su punto las cosas.

-A lo menos -respondió Sancho-, supo vuestra merced poner en su punto el
lanzón, apuntándome a la cabeza, y dándome en las espaldas, gracias a Dios
y a la diligencia que puse en ladearme. Pero vaya, que todo saldrá en la
colada; que yo he oído decir: "Ése te quiere bien, que te hace llorar"; y
más, que suelen los principales señores, tras una mala palabra que dicen a
un criado, darle luego unas calzas; aunque no sé lo que le suelen dar tras
haberle dado de palos, si ya no es que los caballeros andantes dan tras
palos ínsulas o reinos en tierra firme.

-Tal podría correr el dado -dijo don Quijote- que todo lo que dices viniese
a ser verdad; y perdona lo pasado, pues eres discreto y sabes que los
primeros movimientos no son en mano del hombre, y está advertido de aquí
adelante en una cosa, para que te abstengas y reportes en el hablar
demasiado conmigo; que en cuantos libros de caballerías he leído, que son
infinitos, jamás he hallado que ningún escudero hablase tanto con su señor
como tú con el tuyo. Y en verdad que lo tengo a gran falta, tuya y mía:
tuya, en que me estimas en poco; mía, en que no me dejo estimar en más. Sí,
que Gandalín, escudero de Amadís de Gaula, conde fue de la ínsula Firme; y
se lee dél que siempre hablaba a su señor con la gorra en la mano,
inclinada la cabeza y doblado el cuerpo more turquesco. Pues, ¿qué diremos
de Gasabal, escudero de don Galaor, que fue tan callado que, para
declararnos la excelencia de su maravilloso silencio, sola una vez se
nombra su nombre en toda aquella tan grande como verdadera historia? De
todo lo que he dicho has de inferir, Sancho, que es menester hacer
diferencia de amo a mozo, de señor a criado y de caballero a escudero. Así
que, desde hoy en adelante, nos hemos de tratar con más respeto, sin darnos
cordelejo, porque, de cualquiera manera que yo me enoje con vos, ha de ser
mal para el cántaro. Las mercedes y beneficios que yo os he prometido
llegarán a su tiempo; y si no llegaren, el salario, a lo menos, no se ha de
perder, como ya os he dicho.

-Está bien cuanto vuestra merced dice -dijo Sancho-, pero querría yo saber,
por si acaso no llegase el tiempo de las mercedes y fuese necesario acudir
al de los salarios, cuánto ganaba un escudero de un caballero andante en
aquellos tiempos, y si se concertaban por meses, o por días, como peones de
albañir.

-No creo yo -respondió don Quijote- que jamás los tales escuderos
estuvieron a salario, sino a merced. Y si yo ahora te le he señalado a ti
en el testamento cerrado que dejé en mi casa, fue por lo que podía suceder;
que aún no sé cómo prueba en estos tan calamitosos tiempos nuestros la
caballería, y no querría que por pocas cosas penase mi ánima en el otro
mundo. Porque quiero que sepas, Sancho, que en él no hay estado más
peligroso que el de los aventureros.

-Así es verdad -dijo Sancho-, pues sólo el ruido de los mazos de un batán
pudo alborotar y desasosegar el corazón de un tan valeroso andante
aventurero como es vuestra merced. Mas, bien puede estar seguro que, de
aquí adelante, no despliegue mis labios para hacer donaire de las cosas de
vuestra merced, si no fuere para honrarle, como a mi amo y señor natural.
-Desa manera -replicó don Quijote-, vivirás sobre la haz de la tierra;
porque, después de a los padres, a los amos se ha de respetar como si lo
fuesen.





Capítulo XXI. Que trata de la alta aventura y rica ganancia del yelmo de
Mambrino, con otras cosas sucedidas a nuestro invencible caballero


En esto, comenzó a llover un poco, y quisiera Sancho que se entraran en el
molino de los batanes; mas habíales cobrado tal aborrecimiento don Quijote,
por la pesada burla, que en ninguna manera quiso entrar dentro; y así,
torciendo el camino a la derecha mano, dieron en otro como el que habían
llevado el día de antes.

De allí a poco, descubrió don Quijote un hombre a caballo, que traía en la
cabeza una cosa que relumbraba como si fuera de oro, y aún él apenas le
hubo visto, cuando se volvió a Sancho y le dijo:

-Paréceme, Sancho, que no hay refrán que no sea verdadero, porque todos son
sentencias sacadas de la mesma experiencia, madre de las ciencias todas,
especialmente aquel que dice: "Donde una puerta se cierra, otra se abre".
Dígolo porque si anoche nos cerró la ventura la puerta de la que
buscábamos, engañándonos con los batanes, ahora nos abre de par en par
otra, para otra mejor y más cierta aventura; que si yo no acertare a entrar
por ella, mía será la culpa, sin que la pueda dar a la poca noticia de
batanes ni a la escuridad de la noche. Digo esto porque, si no me engaño,
hacia nosotros viene uno que trae en su cabeza puesto el yelmo de Mambrino,
sobre que yo hice el juramento que sabes.

-Mire vuestra merced bien lo que dice, y mejor lo que hace -dijo Sancho-,
que no querría que fuesen otros batanes que nos acabasen de abatanar y
aporrear el sentido.

-¡Válate el diablo por hombre! -replicó don Quijote-. ¿Qué va de yelmo a
batanes?

-No sé nada -respondió Sancho-; mas, a fe que si yo pudiera hablar tanto
como solía, que quizá diera tales razones que vuestra merced viera que se
engañaba en lo que dice.

-¿Cómo me puedo engañar en lo que digo, traidor escrupuloso? -dijo don
Quijote-. Dime, ¿no ves aquel caballero que hacia nosotros viene, sobre un
caballo rucio rodado, que trae puesto en la cabeza un yelmo de oro?
-Lo que yo veo y columbro -respondió Sancho- no es sino un hombre sobre un
asno pardo, como el mío, que trae sobre la cabeza una cosa que relumbra.
-Pues ése es el yelmo de Mambrino -dijo don Quijote-. Apártate a una parte
y déjame con él a solas: verás cuán sin hablar palabra, por ahorrar del
tiempo, concluyo esta aventura y queda por mío el yelmo que tanto he
deseado.

-Yo me tengo en cuidado el apartarme -replicó Sancho-, mas quiera Dios,
torno a decir, que orégano sea, y no batanes.

-Ya os he dicho, hermano, que no me mentéis, ni por pienso, más eso de los
batanes -dijo don Quijote-; que voto..., y no digo más, que os batanee el
alma.

Calló Sancho, con temor que su amo no cumpliese el voto que le había
echado, redondo como una bola.

Es, pues, el caso que el yelmo, y el caballo y caballero que don Quijote
veía, era esto: que en aquel contorno había dos lugares, el uno tan pequeño
que ni tenía botica ni barbero, y el otro, que estaba junto, sí; y
así, el barbero del mayor servía al menor, en el cual tuvo necesidad un
enfermo de sangrarse y otro de hacerse la barba, para lo cual venía el
barbero, y traía una bacía de azófar; y quiso la suerte que, al tiempo que
venía, comenzó a llover, y, porque no se le manchase el sombrero, que debía
de ser nuevo, se puso la bacía sobre la cabeza; y, como estaba limpia,
desde media legua relumbraba. Venía sobre un asno pardo, como Sancho dijo,
y ésta fue la ocasión que a don Quijote le pareció caballo rucio rodado, y
caballero, y yelmo de oro; que todas las cosas que veía, con mucha
facilidad las acomodaba a sus desvariadas caballerías y malandantes
pensamientos. Y cuando él vio que el pobre caballero llegaba cerca, sin
ponerse con él en razones, a todo correr de Rocinante le enristró con el
lanzón bajo, llevando intención de pasarle de parte a parte; mas cuando a
él llegaba, sin detener la furia de su carrera, le dijo:

-¡Defiéndete, cautiva criatura, o entriégame de tu voluntad lo que con
tanta razón se me debe!

El barbero, que, tan sin pensarlo ni temerlo, vio venir aquella fantasma
sobre sí, no tuvo otro remedio, para poder guardarse del golpe de la lanza,
si no fue el dejarse caer del asno abajo; y no hubo tocado al suelo, cuando
se levantó más ligero que un gamo y comenzó a correr por aquel llano, que
no le alcanzara el viento. Dejóse la bacía en el suelo, con la cual se
contentó don Quijote, y dijo que el pagano había andado discreto y que
había imitado al castor, el cual, viéndose acosado de los cazadores, se
taraza y arpa con los dientes aquéllo por lo que él, por distinto natural,
sabe que es perseguido. Mandó a Sancho que alzase el yelmo, el cual,
tomándola en las manos, dijo:

-Por Dios, que la bacía es buena y que vale un real de a ocho como un
maravedí.

Y, dándosela a su amo, se la puso luego en la cabeza, rodeándola a una
parte y a otra, buscándole el encaje; y, como no se le hallaba, dijo:
-Sin duda que el pagano, a cuya medida se forjó primero esta famosa celada,
debía de tener grandísima cabeza, y lo peor dello es que le falta la mitad.
Cuando Sancho oyó llamar a la bacía celada, no pudo tener la risa; mas
vínosele a las mientes la cólera de su amo, y calló en la mitad della.
-¿De qué te ríes, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-Ríome -respondió él- de considerar la gran cabeza que tenía el pagano
dueño deste almete, que no semeja sino una bacía de barbero pintiparada.
-¿Sabes qué imagino, Sancho? Que esta famosa pieza deste encantado yelmo,
por algún estraño acidente, debió de venir a manos de quien no supo conocer
ni estimar su valor, y, sin saber lo que hacía, viéndola de oro purísimo,
debió de fundir la otra mitad para aprovecharse del precio, y de la otra
mitad hizo ésta, que parece bacía de barbero, como tú dices. Pero, sea lo
que fuere; que para mí que la conozco no hace al caso su trasmutación; que
yo la aderezaré en el primer lugar donde haya herrero, y de suerte que no
le haga ventaja, ni aun le llegue, la que hizo y forjó el dios de las
herrerías para el dios de las batallas; y, en este entretanto, la traeré
como pudiere, que más vale algo que no nada; cuanto más, que bien será
bastante para defenderme de alguna pedrada.

-Eso será -dijo Sancho- si no se tira con honda, como se tiraron en la
pelea de los dos ejércitos, cuando le santiguaron a vuestra merced las
muelas y le rompieron el alcuza donde venía aquel benditísimo brebaje que
me hizo vomitar las asaduras.along

-No me da mucha pena el haberle perdido, que ya sabes tú, Sancho -dijo don
Quijote-, que yo tengo la receta en la memoria.

-También la tengo yo -respondió Sancho-, pero si yo le hiciere ni le
probare más en mi vida, aquí sea mi hora. Cuanto más, que no pienso ponerme
en ocasión de haberle menester, porque pienso guardarme con todos mis cinco
sentidos de ser ferido ni de ferir a nadie. De lo del ser otra vez
manteado, no digo nada, que semejantes desgracias mal se pueden prevenir, y
si vienen, no hay que hacer otra cosa sino encoger los hombros, detener el
aliento, cerrar los ojos y dejarse ir por donde la suerte y la manta nos
llevare.

-Mal cristiano eres, Sancho -dijo, oyendo esto, don Quijote-, porque nunca
olvidas la injuria que una vez te han hecho; pues sábete que es de pechos
nobles y generosos no hacer caso de niñerías. ¿Qué pie sacaste cojo, qué
costilla quebrada, qué cabeza rota, para que no se te olvide aquella burla?
Que, bien apurada la cosa, burla fue y pasatiempo; que, a no entenderlo yo
ansí, ya yo hubiera vuelto allá y hubiera hecho en tu venganza más daño que
el que hicieron los griegos por la robada Elena. La cual, si fuera en este
tiempo, o mi Dulcinea fuera en aquél, pudiera estar segura que no tuviera
tanta fama de hermosa como tiene.

Y aquí dio un sospiro, y le puso en las nubes. Y dijo Sancho:

-Pase por burlas, pues la venganza no puede pasar en veras; pero yo sé de
qué calidad fueron las veras y las burlas, y sé también que no se me caerán
de la memoria, como nunca se quitarán de las espaldas. Pero, dejando esto
aparte, dígame vuestra merced qué haremos deste caballo rucio rodado, que
parece asno pardo, que dejó aquí desamparado aquel Martino que vuestra
merced derribó; que, según él puso los pies en polvorosa y cogió las de
Villadiego, no lleva pergenio de volver por él jamás; y ¡para mis barbas,
si no es bueno el rucio!

-Nunca yo acostumbro -dijo don Quijote- despojar a los que venzo, ni es uso
de caballería quitarles los caballos y dejarlos a pie, si ya no fuese que
el vencedor hubiese perdido en la pendencia el suyo; que, en tal caso,
lícito es tomar el del vencido, como ganado en guerra lícita. Así que,
Sancho, deja ese caballo, o asno, o lo que tú quisieres que sea, que, como
su dueño nos vea alongados de aquí, volverá por él.

-Dios sabe si quisiera llevarle -replicó Sancho-, o, por lo menos, trocalle
con este mío, que no me parece tan bueno. Verdaderamente que son estrechas
las leyes de caballería, pues no se estienden a dejar trocar un asno por
otro; y querría saber si podría trocar los aparejos siquiera.

-En eso no estoy muy cierto -respondió don Quijote-; y, en caso de duda,
hasta estar mejor informado, digo que los trueques, si es que tienes dellos
necesidad estrema.

-Tan estrema es -respondió Sancho- que si fueran para mi misma persona, no
los hubiera menester más.

Y luego, habilitado con aquella licencia, hizo mutatio caparum y puso su
jumento a las mil lindezas, dejándole mejorado en tercio y quinto.
Hecho esto, almorzaron de las sobras del real que del acémila despojaron,
bebieron del agua del arroyo de los batanes, sin volver la cara a mirallos:
tal era el aborrecimiento que les tenían por el miedo en que les habían
puesto.

Cortada, pues, la cólera, y aun la malenconía, subieron a caballo, y, sin
tomar determinado camino, por ser muy de caballeros andantes el no tomar
ninguno cierto, se pusieron a caminar por donde la voluntad de Rocinante
quiso, que se llevaba tras sí la de su amo, y aun la del asno, que siempre
le seguía por dondequiera que guiaba, en buen amor y compañía. Con todo
esto, volvieron al camino real y siguieron por él a la ventura, sin otro
disignio alguno.

Yendo, pues, así caminando, dijo Sancho a su amo:

-Señor, ¿quiere vuestra merced darme licencia que departa un poco con él?
Que, después que me puso aquel áspero mandamiento del silencio, se me han
podrido más de cuatro cosas en el estómago, y una sola que ahora tengo en
el pico de la lengua no querría que se mal lograse.

-Dila -dijo don Quijote-, y sé breve en tus razonamientos, que ninguno hay
gustoso si es largo.

-Digo, pues, señor -respondió Sancho-, que, de algunos días a esta parte,
he considerado cuán poco se gana y granjea de andar buscando estas
aventuras que vuestra merced busca por estos desiertos y encrucijadas de
caminos, donde, ya que se venzan y acaben las más eligrosas, no hay quien
las vea ni sepa; y así, se han de quedar en perpetuo silencio, y en
perjuicio de la intención de vuestra merced y de lo que ellas merecen. Y
así, me parece que sería mejor, salvo el mejor parecer de vuestra merced,
que nos fuésemos a servir a algún emperador, o a otro príncipe grande que
tenga alguna guerra, en cuyo servicio vuestra merced muestre el valor de su
persona, sus grandes fuerzas y mayor entendimiento; que, visto esto del
señor a quien sirviéremos, por fuerza nos ha de remunerar, a cada cual
según sus méritos, y allí no faltará quien ponga en escrito las hazañas de
vuestra merced, para perpetua memoria. De las mías no digo nada, pues no
han de salir de los límites escuderiles; aunque sé decir que, si se usa en
la caballería escribir hazañas de escuderos, que no pienso que se han de
quedar las mías entre renglones.

-No dices mal, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-; mas, antes que se llegue a
ese término, es menester andar por el mundo, como en aprobación, buscando
las aventuras, para que, acabando algunas, se cobre nombre y fama tal que,
cuando se fuere a la corte de algún gran monarca, ya sea el caballero
conocido por sus obras; y que, apenas le hayan visto entrar los muchachos
por la puerta de la ciudad, cuando todos le sigan y rodeen, dando voces,
diciendo: ''Éste es el Caballero del Sol'', o de la Sierpe, o de otra
insignia alguna, debajo de la cual hubiere acabado grandes hazañas. ''Éste
es -dirán- el que venció en singular batalla al gigantazo Brocabruno de la
Gran Fuerza; el que desencantó al Gran Mameluco de Persia del largo
encantamento en que había estado casi novecientos años''. Así que, de mano
en mano, irán pregonando tus hechos, y luego, al alboroto de los muchachos
y de la demás gente, se parará a las fenestras de su real palacio el rey de
aquel reino, y así como vea al caballero, conociéndole por las armas o por
la empresa del escudo, forzosamente ha de decir: ''¡Ea, sus! ¡Salgan mis
caballeros, cuantos en mi corte están, a recebir a la flor de la
caballería, que allí viene!'' A cuyo mandamiento saldrán todos, y él
llegará hasta la mitad de la escalera, y le abrazará estrechísimamente, y
le dará paz besándole en el rostro; y luego le llevará por la mano al
aposento de la señora reina, adonde el caballero la hallará con la infanta,
su hija, que ha de ser una de las más fermosas y acabadas doncellas que, en
gran parte de lo descubierto de la tierra, a duras penas se pueda hallar.
Sucederá tras esto, luego en continente, que ella ponga los ojos en el
caballero y él en los della, y cada uno parezca a otro cosa más divina que
humana; y, sin saber cómo ni cómo no, han de quedar presos y enlazados en
la intricable red amorosa, y con gran cuita en sus corazones por no saber
cómo se han de fablar para descubrir sus ansias y sentimientos. Desde allí
le llevarán, sin duda, a algún cuarto del palacio, ricamente aderezado,
donde, habiéndole quitado las armas, le traerán un rico manto de escarlata
con que se cubra; y si bien pareció armado, tan bien y mejor ha de parecer
en farseto. Venida la noche, cenará con el rey, reina e infanta, donde
nunca quitará los ojos della, mirándola a furto de los circustantes, y ella
hará lo mesmo con la mesma sagacidad, porque, como tengo dicho, es muy
discreta doncella. Levantarse han las tablas, y entrará a deshora por la
puerta de la sala un feo y pequeño enano con una fermosa dueña, que, entre
dos gigantes, detrás del enano viene, con cierta aventura, hecha por un
antiquísimo sabio, que el que la acabare será tenido por el mejor caballero
del mundo. Mandará luego el rey que todos los que están presentes la
prueben, y ninguno le dará fin y cima sino el caballero huésped, en mucho
pro de su fama, de lo cual quedará contentísima la infanta, y se tendrá por
contenta y pagada además, por haber puesto y colocado sus pensamientos en
tan alta parte. Y lo bueno es que este rey, o príncipe, o lo que es, tiene
una muy reñida guerra con otro tan poderoso como él, y el caballero huésped
le pide (al cabo de algunos días que ha estado en su corte) licencia para
ir a servirle en aquella guerra dicha. Darásela el rey de muy buen talante,
y el caballero le besará cortésmente las manos por la merced que le face. Y
aquella noche se despedirá de su señora la infanta por las rejas de un
jardín, que cae en el aposento donde ella duerme, por las cuales ya otras
muchas veces la había fablado, siendo medianera y sabidora de todo una
doncella de quien la infanta mucho se fiaba. Sospirará él, desmayaráse
ella, traerá agua la doncella, acuitaráse mucho porque viene la mañana, y
no querría que fuesen descubiertos, por la honra de su señora. Finalmente,
la infanta volverá en sí y dará sus blancas manos por la reja al caballero,
el cual se las besará mil y mil veces y se las bañará en lágrimas. Quedará
concertado entre los dos del modo que se han de hacer saber sus buenos o
malos sucesos, y rogarále la princesa que se detenga lo menos que pudiere;
prometérselo ha él con muchos juramentos; tórnale a besar las manos, y
despídese con tanto sentimiento que estará poco por acabar la vida. Vase
desde allí a su aposento, échase sobre su lecho, no puede dormir del dolor
de la partida, madruga muy de mañana, vase a despedir del rey y de la reina
y de la infanta; dícenle, habiéndose despedido de los dos, que la señora
infanta está mal dispuesta y que no puede recebir visita; piensa el
caballero que es de pena de su partida, traspásasele el corazón, y falta
poco de no dar indicio manifiesto de su pena. Está la doncella medianera
delante, halo de notar todo, váselo a decir a su señora, la cual la recibe
con lágrimas y le dice que una de las mayores penas que tiene es no saber
quién sea su caballero, y si es de linaje de reyes o no; asegúrala la
doncella que no puede caber tanta cortesía, gentileza y valentía como la de
su caballero sino en subjeto real y grave; consuélase con esto la cuitada;
procura consolarse, por no dar mal indicio de sí a sus padres, y, a cabo de
dos días, sale en público. Ya se es ido el caballero: pelea en la guerra,
vence al enemigo del rey, gana muchas ciudades, triunfa de muchas batallas,
vuelve a la corte, ve a su señora por donde suele, conciértase que la pida
a su padre por mujer en pago de sus servicios. No se la quiere dar el rey,
porque no sabe quién es; pero, con todo esto, o robada o de otra cualquier
suerte que sea, la infanta viene a ser su esposa y su padre lo viene a
tener a gran ventura, porque se vino a averiguar que el tal caballero es
hijo de un valeroso rey de no sé qué reino, porque creo que no debe de
estar en el mapa. Muérese el padre, hereda la infanta, queda rey el
caballero en dos palabras. Aquí entra luego el hacer mercedes a su escudero
y a todos aquellos que le ayudaron a subir a tan alto estado: casa a su
escudero con una doncella de la infanta, que será, sin duda, la que fue
tercera en sus amores, que es hija de un duque muy principal.

-Eso pido, y barras derechas -dijo Sancho-; a eso me atengo, porque todo,
al pie de la letra, ha de suceder por vuestra merced, llamándose el
Caballero de la Triste Figura.

-No lo dudes, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-, porque del mesmo y por los
mesmos pasos que esto he contado suben y han subido los caballeros andantes
a ser reyes y emperadores. Sólo falta agora mirar qué rey de los cristianos
o de los paganos tenga guerra y tenga hija hermosa; pero tiempo habrá para
pensar esto, pues, como te tengo dicho, primero se ha de cobrar fama por
otras partes que se acuda a la corte. También me falta otra cosa; que,
puesto caso que se halle rey con guerra y con hija hermosa, y que yo haya
cobrado fama increíble por todo el universo, no sé yo cómo se podía hallar
que yo sea de linaje de reyes, o, por lo menos, primo segundo de emperador;
porque no me querrá el rey dar a su hija por mujer si no está primero muy
enterado en esto, aunque más lo merezcan mis famosos hechos. Así que, por
esta falta, temo perder lo que mi brazo tiene bien merecido. Bien es verdad
que yo soy hijodalgo de solar conocido, de posesión y propriedad y de
devengar quinientos sueldos; y podría ser que el sabio que escribiese mi
historia deslindase de tal manera mi parentela y decendencia, que me
hallase quinto o sesto nieto de rey. Porque te hago saber, Sancho, que hay
dos maneras de linajes en el mundo: unos que traen y derriban su
decendencia de príncipes y monarcas, a quien poco a poco el tiempo ha
deshecho, y han acabado en punta, como pirámide puesta al revés; otros
tuvieron principio de gente baja, y van subiendo de grado en grado, hasta
llegar a ser grandes señores. De manera que está la diferencia en que unos
fueron, que ya no son, y otros son, que ya no fueron; y podría ser yo
déstos que, después de averiguado, hubiese sido mi principio grande y
famoso, con lo cual se debía de contentar el rey, mi suegro, que hubiere de
ser. Y cuando no, la infanta me ha de querer de manera que, a pesar de su
padre, aunque claramente sepa que soy hijo de un azacán, me ha de admitir
por señor y por esposo; y si no, aquí entra el roballa y llevalla donde más
gusto me diere; que el tiempo o la muerte ha de acabar el enojo de sus
padres.

-Ahí entra bien también -dijo Sancho- lo que algunos desalmados dicen: "No
pidas de grado lo que puedes tomar por fuerza"; aunque mejor cuadra decir:
"Más vale salto de mata que ruego de hombres buenos". Dígolo porque si el
señor rey, suegro de vuestra merced, no se quisiere domeñar a entregalle a
mi señora la infanta, no hay sino, como vuestra merced dice, roballa y
trasponella. Pero está el daño que, en tanto que se hagan las paces y se
goce pacíficamente el reino, el pobre escudero se podrá estar a diente en
esto de las mercedes. Si ya no es que la doncella tercera, que ha de ser su
mujer, se sale con la infanta, y él pasa con ella su mala ventura, hasta
que el cielo ordene otra cosa; porque bien podrá, creo yo, desde luego
dársela su señor por ligítima esposa.

-Eso no hay quien la quite -dijo don Quijote.

-Pues, como eso sea -respondió Sancho-, no hay sino encomendarnos a Dios, y
dejar correr la suerte por donde mejor lo encaminare.

-Hágalo Dios -respondió don Quijote- como yo deseo y tú, Sancho, has
menester; y ruin sea quien por ruin se tiene.

-Sea par Dios -dijo Sancho-, que yo cristiano viejo soy, y para ser conde
esto me basta.

-Y aun te sobra -dijo don Quijote-; y cuando no lo fueras, no hacía nada al
caso, porque, siendo yo el rey, bien te puedo dar nobleza, sin que la
compres ni me sirvas con nada. Porque, en haciéndote conde, cátate ahí
caballero, y digan lo que dijeren; que a buena fe que te han de llamar
señoría, mal que les pese.

-Y ¡montas que no sabría yo autorizar el litado! -dijo Sancho.
-Dictado has de decir, que no litado -dijo su amo.

-Sea ansí -respondió Sancho Panza-. Digo que le sabría bien acomodar,
porque, por vida mía, que un tiempo fui muñidor de una cofradía, y que me
asentaba tan bien la ropa de muñidor, que decían todos que tenía presencia
para poder ser prioste de la mesma cofradía. Pues, ¿qué será cuando me
ponga un ropón ducal a cuestas, o me vista de oro y de perlas, a uso de
conde estranjero? Para mí tengo que me han de venir a ver de cien leguas.
-Bien parecerás -dijo don Quijote-, pero será menester que te rapes las
barbas a menudo; que, según las tienes de espesas, aborrascadas y mal
puestas, si no te las rapas a navaja, cada dos días por lo menos, a tiro de
escopeta se echará de ver lo que eres.

-¿Qué hay más -dijo Sancho-, sino tomar un barbero y tenelle asalariado en
casa? Y aun, si fuere menester, le haré que ande tras mí, como caballerizo
de grande.

-Pues, ¿cómo sabes tú -preguntó don Quijote- que los grandes llevan detrás
de sí a sus caballerizos?

-Yo se lo diré -respondió Sancho-: los años pasados estuve un mes en la
corte, y allí vi que, paseándose un señor muy pequeño, que decían que era
muy grande, un hombre le seguía a caballo a todas las vueltas que daba, que
no parecía sino que era su rabo. Pregunté que cómo aquel hombre no se
juntaba con el otro, sino que siempre andaba tras dél. Respondiéronme que
era su caballerizo y que era uso de los grandes llevar tras sí a los tales.
Desde entonces lo sé tan bien que nunca se me ha olvidado.

-Digo que tienes razón -dijo don Quijote-, y que así puedes tú llevar a tu
barbero; que los usos no vinieron todos juntos, ni se inventaron a una, y
puedes ser tú el primero conde que lleve tras sí su barbero; y aun es de
más confianza el hacer la barba que ensillar un caballo.

-Quédese eso del barbero a mi cargo -dijo Sancho-, y al de vuestra merced
se quede el procurar venir a ser rey y el hacerme conde.

-Así será -respondió don Quijote.

Y, alzando los ojos, vio lo que se dirá en el siguiente capítulo.





Capítulo XXII. De la libertad que dio don Quijote a muchos desdichados que,
mal de su grado, los llevaban donde no quisieran ir


Cuenta Cide Hamete Benengeli, autor arábigo y manchego, en esta gravísima,
altisonante, mínima, dulce e imaginada historia que, después que entre el
famoso don Quijote de la Mancha y Sancho Panza, su escudero, pasaron
aquellas razones que en el fin del capítulo veinte y uno quedan referidas,
que don Quijote alzó los ojos y vio que por el camino que llevaba venían
hasta doce hombres a pie, ensartados, como cuentas, en una gran cadena de
hierro por los cuellos, y todos con esposas a las manos. Venían ansimismo
con ellos dos hombres de a caballo y dos de a pie; los de a caballo, con
escopetas de rueda, y los de a pie, con dardos y espadas; y que así como
Sancho Panza los vido, dijo:

-Ésta es cadena de galeotes, gente forzada del rey, que va a las galeras.
-¿Cómo gente forzada? -preguntó don Quijote-. ¿Es posible que el rey haga
fuerza a ninguna gente?

-No digo eso -respondió Sancho-, sino que es gente que, por sus delitos, va
condenada a servir al rey en las galeras de por fuerza.

-En resolución -replicó don Quijote-, comoquiera que ello sea, esta gente,
aunque los llevan, van de por fuerza, y no de su voluntad.

-Así es -dijo Sancho.

-Pues desa manera -dijo su amo-, aquí encaja la ejecución de mi oficio:
desfacer fuerzas y socorrer y acudir a los miserables.

-Advierta vuestra merced -dijo Sancho- que la justicia, que es el mesmo
rey, no hace fuerza ni agravio a semejante gente, sino que los castiga en
pena de sus delitos.

Llegó, en esto, la cadena de los galeotes, y don Quijote, con muy corteses
razones, pidió a los que iban en su guarda fuesen servidos de informalle y
decille la causa, o causas, por que llevan aquella gente de aquella manera.
Una de las guardas de a caballo respondió que eran galeotes, gente de Su
Majestad que iba a galeras, y que no había más que decir, ni él tenía más
que saber.

-Con todo eso -replicó don Quijote-, querría saber de cada uno dellos en
particular la causa de su desgracia.

Añadió a éstas otras tales y tan comedidas razones, para moverlos a que
dijesen lo que deseaba, que la otra guarda de a caballo le dijo:
-Aunque llevamos aquí el registro y la fe de las sentencias de cada uno
destos malaventurados, no es tiempo éste de detenerles a sacarlas ni a
leellas; vuestra merced llegue y se lo pregunte a ellos mesmos, que ellos
lo dirán si quisieren, que sí querrán, porque es gente que recibe gusto de
hacer y decir bellaquerías.

Con esta licencia, que don Quijote se tomara aunque no se la dieran, se
llegó a la cadena, y al primero le preguntó que por qué pecados iba de tan
mala guisa. Él le respondió que por enamorado iba de aquella manera.
-¿Por eso no más? -replicó don Quijote-. Pues, si por enamorados echan a
galeras, días ha que pudiera yo estar bogando en ellas.

-No son los amores como los que vuestra merced piensa -dijo el galeote-;
que los míos fueron que quise tanto a una canasta de colar, atestada de
ropa blanca, que la abracé conmigo tan fuertemente que, a no quitármela la
justicia por fuerza, aún hasta agora no la hubiera dejado de mi voluntad.
Fue en fragante, no hubo lugar de tormento; concluyóse la causa,
acomodáronme las espaldas con ciento, y por añadidura tres precisos de
gurapas, y acabóse la obra.

-¿Qué son gurapas? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Gurapas son galeras -respondió el galeote.

El cual era un mozo de hasta edad de veinte y cuatro años, y dijo que era
natural de Piedrahíta. Lo mesmo preguntó don Quijote al segundo, el cual no
respondió palabra, según iba de triste y malencónico; mas respondió por él
el primero, y dijo:

-Éste, señor, va por canario; digo, por músico y cantor.

-Pues, ¿cómo -repitió don Quijote-, por músicos y cantores van también a
galeras?

-Sí, señor -respondió el galeote-, que no hay peor cosa que cantar en el
ansia.

-Antes, he yo oído decir -dijo don Quijote- que quien canta sus males
espanta.

-Acá es al revés -dijo el galeote-, que quien canta una vez llora toda la
vida.

-No lo entiendo -dijo don Quijote.

Mas una de las guardas le dijo:

-Señor caballero, cantar en el ansia se dice, entre esta gente non santa,
confesar en el tormento. A este pecador le dieron tormento y confesó su
delito, que era ser cuatrero, que es ser ladrón de bestias, y, por haber
confesado, le condenaron por seis años a galeras, amén de docientos azotes
que ya lleva en las espaldas. Y va siempre pensativo y triste, porque los
demás ladrones que allá quedan y aquí van le maltratan y aniquilan, y
escarnecen y tienen en poco, porque confesó y no tuvo ánimo de decir nones.
Porque dicen ellos que tantas letras tiene un no como un sí, y que harta
ventura tiene un delincuente, que está en su lengua su vida o su muerte, y
no en la de los testigos y probanzas; y para mí tengo que no van muy fuera
de camino.

-Y yo lo entiendo así -respondió don Quijote.

El cual, pasando al tercero, preguntó lo que a los otros; el cual, de
presto y con mucho desenfado, respondió y dijo:

-Yo voy por cinco años a las señoras gurapas por faltarme diez ducados.
-Yo daré veinte de muy buena gana -dijo don Quijote- por libraros desa
pesadumbre.

-Eso me parece -respondió el galeote- como quien tiene dineros en mitad del
golfo y se está muriendo de hambre, sin tener adonde comprar lo que ha
menester. Dígolo porque si a su tiempo tuviera yo esos veinte ducados que
vuestra merced ahora me ofrece, hubiera untado con ellos la péndola del
escribano y avivado el ingenio del procurador, de manera que hoy me viera
en mitad de la plaza de Zocodover, de Toledo, y no en este camino,
atraillado como galgo; pero Dios es grande: paciencia y basta.

Pasó don Quijote al cuarto, que era un hombre de venerable rostro con una
barba blanca que le pasaba del pecho; el cual, oyéndose preguntar la causa
por que allí venía, comenzó a llorar y no respondió palabra; mas el quinto
condenado le sirvió de lengua, y dijo:

-Este hombre honrado va por cuatro años a galeras, habiendo paseado las
acostumbradas vestido en pompa y a caballo.

-Eso es -dijo Sancho Panza-, a lo que a mí me parece, haber salido a la
vergüenza.

-Así es -replicó el galeote-; y la culpa por que le dieron esta pena es por
haber sido corredor de oreja, y aun de todo el cuerpo. En efecto, quiero
decir que este caballero va por alcahuete, y por tener asimesmo sus puntas
y collar de hechicero.

-A no haberle añadido esas puntas y collar -dijo don Quijote-, por
solamente el alcahuete limpio, no merecía él ir a bogar en las galeras,
sino a mandallas y a ser general dellas; porque no es así comoquiera el
oficio de alcahuete, que es oficio de discretos y necesarísimo en la
república bien ordenada, y que no le debía ejercer sino gente muy bien
nacida; y aun había de haber veedor y examinador de los tales, como le hay
de los demás oficios, con número deputado y conocido, como corredores de
lonja; y desta manera se escusarían muchos males que se causan por andar
este oficio y ejercicio entre gente idiota y de poco entendimiento, como
son mujercillas de poco más a menos, pajecillos y truhanes de pocos años y
de poca experiencia, que, a la más necesaria ocasión y cuando es menester
dar una traza que importe, se les yelan las migas entre la boca y la mano y
no saben cuál es su mano derecha. Quisiera pasar adelante y dar las razones
por que convenía hacer elección de los que en la república habían de tener
tan necesario oficio, pero no es el lugar acomodado para ello: algún día lo
diré a quien lo pueda proveer y remediar. Sólo digo ahora que la pena que
me ha causado ver estas blancas canas y este rostro venerable en tanta
fatiga, por alcahuete, me la ha quitado el adjunto de ser hechicero; aunque
bien sé que no hay hechizos en el mundo que puedan mover y forzar la
voluntad, como algunos simples piensan; que es libre nuestro albedrío, y no
hay yerba ni encanto que le fuerce. Lo que suelen hacer algunas mujercillas
simples y algunos embusteros bellacos es algunas misturas y venenos con que
vuelven locos a los hombres, dando a entender que tienen fuerza para hacer
querer bien, siendo, como digo, cosa imposible forzar la voluntad.
-Así es -dijo el buen viejo-, y, en verdad, señor, que en lo de hechicero
que no tuve culpa; en lo de alcahuete, no lo pude negar. Pero nunca pensé
que hacía mal en ello: que toda mi intención era que todo el mundo se
holgase y viviese en paz y quietud, sin pendencias ni penas; pero no me
aprovechó nada este buen deseo para dejar de ir adonde no espero volver,
según me cargan los años y un mal de orina que llevo, que no me deja
reposar un rato.

Y aquí tornó a su llanto, como de primero; y túvole Sancho tanta compasión,
que sacó un real de a cuatro del seno y se le dio de limosna.

Pasó adelante don Quijote, y preguntó a otro su delito, el cual respondió
con no menos, sino con mucha más gallardía que el pasado:

-Yo voy aquí porque me burlé demasiadamente con dos primas hermanas mías, y
con otras dos hermanas que no lo eran mías; finalmente, tanto me burlé con
todas, que resultó de la burla crecer la parentela, tan intricadamente que
no hay diablo que la declare. Probóseme todo, faltó favor, no tuve dineros,
víame a pique de perder los tragaderos, sentenciáronme a galeras por seis
años, consentí: castigo es de mi culpa; mozo soy: dure la vida, que con
ella todo se alcanza. Si vuestra merced, señor caballero, lleva alguna cosa
con que socorrer a estos pobretes, Dios se lo pagará en el cielo, y
nosotros tendremos en la tierra cuidado de rogar a Dios en nuestras
oraciones por la vida y salud de vuestra merced, que sea tan larga y tan
buena como su buena presencia merece.

Éste iba en hábito de estudiante, y dijo una de las guardas que era muy
grande hablador y muy gentil latino.

Tras todos éstos, venía un hombre de muy buen parecer, de edad de treinta
años, sino que al mirar metía el un ojo en el otro un poco. Venía
diferentemente atado que los demás, porque traía una cadena al pie, tan
grande que se la liaba por todo el cuerpo, y dos argollas a la garganta, la
una en la cadena, y la otra de las que llaman guardaamigo o piedeamigo, de
la cual decendían dos hierros que llegaban a la cintura, en los cuales se
asían dos esposas, donde llevaba las manos, cerradas con un grueso candado,
de manera que ni con las manos podía llegar a la boca, ni podía bajar la
cabeza a llegar a las manos. Preguntó don Quijote que cómo iba aquel hombre
con tantas prisiones más que los otros. Respondióle la guarda porque tenía
aquel solo más delitos que todos los otros juntos, y que era tan atrevido y
tan grande bellaco que, aunque le llevaban de aquella manera, no iban
seguros dél, sino que temían que se les había de huir.

-¿Qué delitos puede tener -dijo don Quijote-, si no han merecido más pena
que echalle a las galeras?

-Va por diez años -replicó la guarda-, que es como muerte cevil. No se
quiera saber más, sino que este buen hombre es el famoso Ginés de
Pasamonte, que por otro nombre llaman Ginesillo de Parapilla.

-Señor comisario -dijo entonces el galeote-, váyase poco a poco, y no
andemos ahora a deslindar nombres y sobrenombres. Ginés me llamo y no
Ginesillo, y Pasamonte es mi alcurnia, y no Parapilla, como voacé dice; y
cada uno se dé una vuelta a la redonda, y no hará poco.

-Hable con menos tono -replicó el comisario-, señor ladrón de más de la
marca, si no quiere que le haga callar, mal que le pese.

-Bien parece -respondió el galeote- que va el hombre como Dios es servido,
pero algún día sabrá alguno si me llamo Ginesillo de Parapilla o no.
-Pues, ¿no te llaman ansí, embustero? -dijo la guarda.

-Sí llaman -respondió Ginés-, mas yo haré que no me lo llamen, o me las
pelaría donde yo digo entre mis dientes. Señor caballero, si tiene algo que
darnos, dénoslo ya, y vaya con Dios, que ya enfada con tanto querer saber
vidas ajenas; y si la mía quiere saber, sepa que yo soy Ginés de Pasamonte,
cuya vida está escrita por estos pulgares.

-Dice verdad -dijo el comisario-: que él mesmo ha escrito su historia, que
no hay más, y deja empeñado el libro en la cárcel en docientos reales.
-Y le pienso quitar -dijo Ginés-, si quedara en docientos ducados.
-¿Tan bueno es? -dijo don Quijote.

-Es tan bueno -respondió Ginés- que mal año para Lazarillo de Tormes y para
todos cuantos de aquel género se han escrito o escribieren. Lo que le sé
decir a voacé es que trata verdades, y que son verdades tan lindas y tan
donosas que no pueden haber mentiras que se le igualen.

-¿Y cómo se intitula el libro? -preguntó don Quijote.

-La vida de Ginés de Pasamonte -respondió el mismo.

-¿Y está acabado? -preguntó don Quijote.

-¿Cómo puede estar acabado -respondió él-, si aún no está acabada mi vida?
Lo que está escrito es desde mi nacimiento hasta el punto que esta última
vez me han echado en galeras.

-Luego, ¿otra vez habéis estado en ellas? -dijo don Quijote.

-Para servir a Dios y al rey, otra vez he estado cuatro años, y ya sé a qué
sabe el bizcocho y el corbacho -respondió Ginés-; y no me pesa mucho de ir
a ellas, porque allí tendré lugar de acabar mi libro, que me quedan muchas
cosas que decir, y en las galeras de España hay mas sosiego de aquel que
sería menester, aunque no es menester mucho más para lo que yo tengo de
escribir, porque me lo sé de coro.

-Hábil pareces -dijo don Quijote.

-Y desdichado -respondió Ginés-; porque siempre las desdichas persiguen al
buen ingenio.

-Persiguen a los bellacos -dijo el comisario.

-Ya le he dicho, señor comisario -respondió Pasamonte-, que se vaya poco a
poco, que aquellos señores no le dieron esa vara para que maltratase a los
pobretes que aquí vamos, sino para que nos guiase y llevase adonde Su
Majestad manda. Si no, ¡por vida de...! ¡Basta!, que podría ser que
saliesen algún día en la colada las manchas que se hicieron en la venta; y
todo el mundo calle, y viva bien, y hable mejor y caminemos, que ya es
mucho regodeo éste.

Alzó la vara en alto el comisario para dar a Pasamonte en respuesta de sus
amenazas, mas don Quijote se puso en medio y le rogó que no le maltratase,
pues no era mucho que quien llevaba tan atadas las manos tuviese algún
tanto suelta la lengua. Y, volviéndose a todos los de la cadena, dijo:
-De todo cuanto me habéis dicho, hermanos carísimos, he sacado en limpio
que, aunque os han castigado por vuestras culpas, las penas que vais a
padecer no os dan mucho gusto, y que vais a ellas muy de mala gana y muy
contra vuestra voluntad; y que podría ser que el poco ánimo que aquél tuvo
en el tormento, la falta de dineros déste, el poco favor del otro y,
finalmente, el torcido juicio del juez, hubiese sido causa de vuestra
perdición y de no haber salido con la justicia que de vuestra parte
teníades. Todo lo cual se me representa a mí ahora en la memoria de manera
que me está diciendo, persuadiendo y aun forzando que muestre con vosotros
el efeto para que el cielo me arrojó al mundo, y me hizo profesar en él la
orden de caballería que profeso, y el voto que en ella hice de favorecer a
los menesterosos y opresos de los mayores. Pero, porque sé que una de las
partes de la prudencia es que lo que se puede hacer por bien no se haga por
mal, quiero rogar a estos señores guardianes y comisario sean servidos de
desataros y dejaros ir en paz, que no faltarán otros que sirvan al rey en
mejores ocasiones; porque me parece duro caso hacer esclavos a los que Dios
y naturaleza hizo libres. Cuanto más, señores guardas -añadió don Quijote-,
que estos pobres no han cometido nada contra vosotros. Allá se lo haya cada
uno con su pecado; Dios hay en el cielo, que no se descuida de castigar al
malo ni de premiar al bueno, y no es bien que los hombres honrados sean
verdugos de los otros hombres, no yéndoles nada en ello. Pido esto con esta
mansedumbre y sosiego, porque tenga, si lo cumplís, algo que agradeceros;
y, cuando de grado no lo hagáis, esta lanza y esta espada, con el valor de
mi brazo, harán que lo hagáis por fuerza.

-¡Donosa majadería! -respondió el comisario- ¡Bueno está el donaire con que
ha salido a cabo de rato! ¡Los forzados del rey quiere que le dejemos, como
si tuviéramos autoridad para soltarlos o él la tuviera para mandárnoslo!
Váyase vuestra merced, señor, norabuena, su camino adelante, y enderécese
ese bacín que trae en la cabeza, y no ande buscando tres pies al gato.
-¡Vos sois el gato, y el rato, y el bellaco! -respondió don Quijote.
Y, diciendo y haciendo, arremetió con él tan presto que, sin que tuviese
lugar de ponerse en defensa, dio con él en el suelo, malherido de una
lanzada; y avínole bien, que éste era el de la escopeta. Las demás guardas
quedaron atónitas y suspensas del no esperado acontecimiento; pero,
volviendo sobre sí, pusieron mano a sus espadas los de a caballo, y los de
a pie a sus dardos, y arremetieron a don Quijote, que con mucho sosiego los
aguardaba; y, sin duda, lo pasara mal si los galeotes, viendo la ocasión
que se les ofrecía de alcanzar libertad, no la procuraran, procurando
romper la cadena donde venían ensartados. Fue la revuelta de manera que las
guardas, ya por acudir a los galeotes, que se desataban, ya por acometer a
don Quijote, que los acometía, no hicieron cosa que fuese de provecho.
Ayudó Sancho, por su parte, a la soltura de Ginés de Pasamonte, que fue el
primero que saltó en la campaña libre y desembarazado, y, arremetiendo al
comisario caído, le quitó la espada y la escopeta, con la cual, apuntando
al uno y señalando al otro, sin disparalla jamás, no quedó guarda en todo
el campo, porque se fueron huyendo, así de la escopeta de Pasamonte como de
las muchas pedradas que los ya sueltos galeotes les tiraban.
Entristecióse mucho Sancho deste suceso, porque se le representó que los
que iban huyendo habían de dar noticia del caso a la Santa Hermandad, la
cual, a campana herida, saldría a buscar los delincuentes, y así se lo dijo
a su amo, y le rogó que luego de allí se partiesen y se emboscasen en la
sierra, que estaba cerca.

-Bien está eso -dijo don Quijote-, pero yo sé lo que ahora conviene que se
haga.

Y, llamando a todos los galeotes, que andaban alborotados y habían
despojado al comisario hasta dejarle en cueros, se le pusieron todos a la
redonda para ver lo que les mandaba, y así les dijo:

-De gente bien nacida es agradecer los beneficios que reciben, y uno de los
pecados que más a Dios ofende es la ingratitud. Dígolo porque ya habéis
visto, señores, con manifiesta experiencia, el que de mí habéis recebido;
en pago del cual querría, y es mi voluntad, que, cargados de esa cadena que
quité de vuestros cuellos, luego os pongáis en camino y vais a la ciudad
del Toboso, y allí os presentéis ante la señora Dulcinea del Toboso y le
digáis que su caballero, el de la Triste Figura, se le envía a encomendar,
y le contéis, punto por punto, todos los que ha tenido esta famosa aventura
hasta poneros en la deseada libertad; y, hecho esto, os podréis ir donde
quisiéredes a la buena ventura.

Respondió por todos Ginés de Pasamonte, y dijo:

-Lo que vuestra merced nos manda, señor y libertador nuestro, es imposible
de toda imposibilidad cumplirlo, porque no podemos ir juntos por los
caminos, sino solos y divididos, y cada uno por su parte, procurando
meterse en las entrañas de la tierra, por no ser hallado de la Santa
Hermandad, que, sin duda alguna, ha de salir en nuestra busca. Lo que
vuestra merced puede hacer, y es justo que haga, es mudar ese servicio y
montazgo de la señora Dulcinea del Toboso en alguna cantidad de avemarías y
credos, que nosotros diremos por la intención de vuestra merced; y ésta es
cosa que se podrá cumplir de noche y de día, huyendo o reposando, en paz o
en guerra; pero pensar que hemos de volver ahora a las ollas de Egipto,
digo, a tomar nuestra cadena y a ponernos en camino del Toboso, es pensar
que es ahora de noche, que aún no son las diez del día, y es pedir a
nosotros eso como pedir peras al olmo.

-Pues ¡voto a tal! -dijo don Quijote, ya puesto en cólera-, don hijo de la
puta, don Ginesillo de Paropillo, o como os llamáis, que habéis de ir vos
solo, rabo entre piernas, con toda la cadena a cuestas.

Pasamonte, que no era nada bien sufrido, estando ya enterado que don
Quijote no era muy cuerdo, pues tal disparate había cometido como el de
querer darles libertad, viéndose tratar de aquella manera, hizo del ojo a
los compañeros, y, apartándose aparte, comenzaron a llover tantas piedras
sobre don Quijote, que no se daba manos a cubrirse con la rodela; y el
pobre de Rocinante no hacía más caso de la espuela que si fuera hecho de
bronce. Sancho se puso tras su asno, y con él se defendía de la nube y
pedrisco que sobre entrambos llovía. No se pudo escudar tan bien don
Quijote que no le acertasen no sé cuántos guijarros en el cuerpo, con tanta
fuerza que dieron con él en el suelo; y apenas hubo caído, cuando fue sobre
él el estudiante y le quitó la bacía de la cabeza, y diole con ella tres o
cuatro golpes en las espaldas y otros tantos en la tierra, con que la hizo
pedazos. Quitáronle una ropilla que traía sobre las armas, y las medias
calzas le querían quitar si las grebas no lo estorbaran. A Sancho le
quitaron el gabán, y, dejándole en pelota, repartiendo entre sí los demás
despojos de la batalla, se fueron cada uno por su parte, con más cuidado de
escaparse de la Hermandad, que temían, que de cargarse de la cadena e ir a
presentarse ante la señora Dulcinea del Toboso.

Solos quedaron jumento y Rocinante, Sancho y Don Quijote; el jumento,
cabizbajo y pensativo, sacudiendo de cuando en cuando las orejas, pensando
que aún no había cesado la borrasca de las piedras, que le perseguían los
oídos; Rocinante, tendido junto a su amo, que también vino al suelo de otra
pedrada; Sancho, en pelota y temeroso de la Santa Hermandad; don Quijote,
mohinísimo de verse tan malparado por los mismos a quien tanto bien había
hecho.





Capítulo XXIII. De lo que le aconteció al famoso don Quijote en Sierra
Morena, que fue una de las más raras aventuras que en esta verdadera
historia se cuentan


Viéndose tan malparado don Quijote, dijo a su escudero:

-Siempre, Sancho, lo he oído decir, que el hacer bien a villanos es echar
agua en la mar. Si yo hubiera creído lo que me dijiste, yo hubiera escusado
esta pesadumbre; pero ya está hecho: paciencia, y escarmentar para desde
aquí adelante.

-Así escarmentará vuestra merced -respondió Sancho- como yo soy turco;
pero, pues dice que si me hubiera creído se hubiera escusado este daño,
créame ahora y escusará otro mayor; porque le hago saber que con la Santa
Hermandad no hay usar de caballerías, que no se le da a ella por cuantos
caballeros andantes hay dos maravedís; y sepa que ya me parece que sus
saetas me zumban por los oídos.

-Naturalmente eres cobarde, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, pero, porque no
digas que soy contumaz y que jamás hago lo que me aconsejas, por esta vez
quiero tomar tu consejo y apartarme de la furia que tanto temes; mas ha de
ser con una condición: que jamás, en vida ni en muerte, has de decir a
nadie que yo me retiré y aparté deste peligro de miedo, sino por complacer
a tus ruegos; que si otra cosa dijeres, mentirás en ello, y desde ahora
para entonces, y desde entonces para ahora, te desmiento, y digo que
mientes y mentirás todas las veces que lo pensares o lo dijeres. Y no me
repliques más, que en sólo pensar que me aparto y retiro de algún peligro,
especialmente déste, que parece que lleva algún es no es de sombra de
miedo, estoy ya para quedarme, y para aguardar aquí solo, no solamente a la
Santa Hermandad que dices y temes, sino a los hermanos de los doce tribus
de Israel, y a los siete Macabeos, y a Cástor y a Pólux, y aun a todos los
hermanos y hermandades que hay en el mundo.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, que el retirar no es huir, ni el esperar es
cordura, cuando el peligro sobrepuja a la esperanza, y de sabios es
guardarse hoy para mañana y no aventurarse todo en un día. Y sepa que,
aunque zafio y villano, todavía se me alcanza algo desto que llaman buen
gobierno; así que, no se arrepienta de haber tomado mi consejo, sino suba
en Rocinante, si puede, o si no yo le ayudaré, y sígame, que el caletre me
dice que hemos menester ahora más los pies que las manos.

Subió don Quijote, sin replicarle más palabra, y, guiando Sancho sobre su
asno, se entraron por una parte de Sierra Morena, que allí junto estaba,
llevando Sancho intención de atravesarla toda e ir a salir al Viso, o a
Almodóvar del Campo, y esconderse algunos días por aquellas asperezas, por
no ser hallados si la Hermandad los buscase. Animóle a esto haber visto que
de la refriega de los galeotes se había escapado libre la despensa que
sobre su asno venía, cosa que la juzgó a milagro, según fue lo que llevaron
y buscaron los galeotes.

Así como don Quijote entró por aquellas montañas, se le alegró el corazón,
pareciéndole aquellos lugares acomodados para las aventuras que buscaba.
Reducíansele a la memoria los maravillosos acaecimientos que en semejantes
soledades y asperezas habían sucedido a caballeros andantes. Iba pensando
en estas cosas, tan embebecido y trasportado en ellas que de ninguna otra
se acordaba. Ni Sancho llevaba otro cuidado -después que le pareció que
caminaba por parte segura- sino de satisfacer su estómago con los relieves
que del despojo clerical habían quedado; y así, iba tras su amo sentado a
la mujeriega sobre su jumento, sacando de un costal y embaulando en su
panza; y no se le diera por hallar otra ventura, entretanto que iba de
aquella manera, un ardite.

En esto, alzó los ojos y vio que su amo estaba parado, procurando con la
punta del lanzón alzar no sé qué bulto que estaba caído en el suelo, por lo
cual se dio priesa a llegar a ayudarle si fuese menester; y cuando llegó
fue a tiempo que alzaba con la punta del lanzón un cojín y una maleta asida
a él, medio podridos, o podridos del todo, y deshechos; mas, pesaba tanto,
que fue necesario que Sancho se apease a tomarlos, y mandóle su amo que
viese lo que en la maleta venía.

Hízolo con mucha presteza Sancho, y, aunque la maleta venía cerrada con una
cadena y su candado, por lo roto y podrido della vio lo que en ella había,
que eran cuatro camisas de delgada holanda y otras cosas de lienzo, no
menos curiosas que limpias, y en un pañizuelo halló un buen montoncillo de
escudos de oro; y, así como los vio, dijo:

-¡Bendito sea todo el cielo, que nos ha deparado una aventura que sea de
provecho!

Y buscando más, halló un librillo de memoria, ricamente guarnecido. Éste le
pidió don Quijote, y mandóle que guardase el dinero y lo tomase para él.
Besóle las manos Sancho por la merced, y, desvalijando a la valija de su
lencería, la puso en el costal de la despensa. Todo lo cual visto por don
Quijote, dijo:

-Paréceme, Sancho, y no es posible que sea otra cosa, que algún caminante
descaminado debió de pasar por esta sierra, y, salteándole malandrines, le
debieron de matar, y le trujeron a enterrar en esta tan escondida parte.
-No puede ser eso -respondió Sancho-, porque si fueran ladrones, no se
dejaran aquí este dinero.

-Verdad dices -dijo don Quijote-, y así, no adivino ni doy en lo que esto
pueda ser; mas, espérate: veremos si en este librillo de memoria hay alguna
cosa escrita por donde podamos rastrear y venir en conocimiento de lo que
deseamos.

Abrióle, y lo primero que halló en él escrito, como en borrador, aunque de
muy buena letra, fue un soneto, que, leyéndole alto porque Sancho también
lo oyese, vio que decía desta manera:

O le falta al Amor conocimiento,

o le sobra crueldad, o no es mi pena

igual a la ocasión que me condena

al género más duro de tormento.

Pero si Amor es dios, es argumento

que nada ignora, y es razón muy buena

que un dios no sea cruel. Pues, ¿quién ordena

el terrible dolor que adoro y siento?

Si digo que sois vos, Fili, no acierto;

que tanto mal en tanto bien no cabe,

ni me viene del cielo esta rüina.

Presto habré de morir, que es lo más cierto;

que al mal de quien la causa no se sabe

milagro es acertar la medicina.

-Por esa trova -dijo Sancho- no se puede saber nada, si ya no es que por
ese hilo que está ahí se saque el ovillo de todo.

-¿Qué hilo está aquí? -dijo don Quijote.

-Paréceme -dijo Sancho- que vuestra merced nombró ahí hilo.

-No dije sino Fili -respondió don Quijote-, y éste, sin duda, es el nombre
de la dama de quien se queja el autor deste soneto; y a fe que debe de ser
razonable poeta, o yo sé poco del arte.

-Luego, ¿también -dijo Sancho- se le entiende a vuestra merced de trovas?
-Y más de lo que tú piensas -respondió don Quijote-, y veráslo cuando
lleves una carta, escrita en verso de arriba abajo, a mi señora Dulcinea
del Toboso. Porque quiero que sepas, Sancho, que todos o los más caballeros
andantes de la edad pasada eran grandes trovadores y grandes músicos; que
estas dos habilidades, o gracias, por mejor decir, son anexas a los
enamorados andantes. Verdad es que las coplas de los pasados caballeros
tienen más de espíritu que de primor.

-Lea más vuestra merced -dijo Sancho-, que ya hallará algo que nos
satisfaga.

Volvió la hoja don Quijote y dijo:

-Esto es prosa, y parece carta.

-¿Carta misiva, señor? -preguntó Sancho.

-En el principio no parece sino de amores -respondió don Quijote.
-Pues lea vuestra merced alto -dijo Sancho-, que gusto mucho destas cosas
de amores.

-Que me place -dijo don Quijote.

Y, leyéndola alto, como Sancho se lo había rogado, vio que decía desta
manera:

Tu falsa promesa y mi cierta desventura me llevan a parte donde antes
volverán a tus oídos las nuevas de mi muerte que las razones de mis quejas.
Desechásteme, ¡oh ingrata!, por quien tiene más, no por quien vale más que
yo; mas si la virtud fuera riqueza que se estimara, no envidiara yo dichas
ajenas ni llorara desdichas propias. Lo que levantó tu hermosura han
derribado tus obras: por ella entendí que eras ángel, y por ellas conozco
que eres mujer. Quédate en paz, causadora de mi guerra, y haga el cielo que
los engaños de tu esposo estén siempre encubiertos, porque tú no quedes
arrepentida de lo que heciste y yo no tome venganza de lo que no deseo.
Acabando de leer la carta, dijo don Quijote:

-Menos por ésta que por los versos se puede sacar más de que quien la
escribió es algún desdeñado amante.

Y, hojeando casi todo el librillo, halló otros versos y cartas, que algunos
pudo leer y otros no; pero lo que todos contenían eran quejas, lamentos,
desconfianzas, sabores y sinsabores, favores y desdenes, solenizados los
unos y llorados los otros.

En tanto que don Quijote pasaba el libro, pasaba Sancho la maleta, sin
dejar rincón en toda ella, ni en el cojín, que no buscase, escudriñase e
inquiriese, ni costura que no deshiciese, ni vedija de lana que no
escarmenase, porque no se quedase nada por diligencia ni mal recado: tal
golosina habían despertado en él los hallados escudos, que pasaban de
ciento. Y, aunque no halló mas de lo hallado, dio por bien empleados los
vuelos de la manta, el vomitar del brebaje, las bendiciones de las estacas,
las puñadas del arriero, la falta de las alforjas, el robo del gabán y toda
la hambre, sed y cansancio que había pasado en servicio de su buen señor,
pareciéndole que estaba más que rebién pagado con la merced recebida de la
entrega del hallazgo.

Con gran deseo quedó el Caballero de la Triste Figura de saber quién fuese
el dueño de la maleta, conjeturando, por el soneto y carta, por el dinero
en oro y por las tan buenas camisas, que debía de ser de algún principal
enamorado, a quien desdenes y malos tratamientos de su dama debían de haber
conducido a algún desesperado término. Pero, como por aquel lugar
inhabitable y escabroso no parecía persona alguna de quien poder
informarse, no se curó de más que de pasar adelante, sin llevar otro camino
que aquel que Rocinante quería, que era por donde él podía caminar, siempre
con imaginación que no podía faltar por aquellas malezas alguna estraña
aventura.

Yendo, pues, con este pensamiento, vio que, por cima de una montañuela que
delante de los ojos se le ofrecía, iba saltando un hombre, de risco en
risco y de mata en mata, con estraña ligereza. Figurósele que iba desnudo,
la barba negra y espesa, los cabellos muchos y rabultados, los pies
descalzos y las piernas sin cosa alguna; los muslos cubrían unos calzones,
al parecer de terciopelo leonado, mas tan hechos pedazos que por muchas
partes se le descubrían las carnes. Traía la cabeza descubierta, y, aunque
pasó con la ligereza que se ha dicho, todas estas menudencias miró y notó
el Caballero de la Triste Figura; y, aunque lo procuró, no pudo seguille,
porque no era dado a la debilidad de Rocinante andar por aquellas
asperezas, y más siendo él de suyo pisacorto y flemático. Luego imaginó don
Quijote que aquél era el dueño del cojín y de la maleta, y propuso en sí de
buscalle, aunque supiese andar un año por aquellas montañas hasta hallarle;
y así, mandó a Sancho que se apease del asno y atajase por la una parte de
la montaña, que él iría por la otra y podría ser que topasen, con esta
diligencia, con aquel hombre que con tanta priesa se les había quitado de
delante.

-No podré hacer eso -respondió Sancho-, porque, en apartándome de vuestra
merced, luego es conmigo el miedo, que me asalta con mil géneros de
sobresaltos y visiones. Y sírvale esto que digo de aviso, para que de aquí
adelante no me aparte un dedo de su presencia.

-Así será -dijo el de la Triste Figura-, y yo estoy muy contento de que te
quieras valer de mi ánimo, el cual no te ha de faltar, aunque te falte el
ánima del cuerpo. Y vente ahora tras mí poco a poco, o como pudieres, y haz
de los ojos lanternas; rodearemos esta serrezuela: quizá toparemos con
aquel hombre que vimos, el cual, sin duda alguna, no es otro que el dueño
de nuestro hallazgo.

A lo que Sancho respondió:

-Harto mejor sería no buscalle, porque si le hallamos y acaso fuese el
dueño del dinero, claro está que lo tengo de restituir; y así, fuera mejor,
sin hacer esta inútil diligencia, poseerlo yo con buena fe hasta que, por
otra vía menos curiosa y diligente, pareciera su verdadero señor; y quizá
fuera a tiempo que lo hubiera gastado, y entonces el rey me hacía franco.
-Engáñaste en eso, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-; que, ya que hemos caído
en sospecha de quién es el dueño, cuasi delante, estamos obligados a
buscarle y volvérselos; y, cuando no le buscásemos, la vehemente sospecha
que tenemos de que él lo sea nos pone ya en tanta culpa como si lo fuese.
Así que, Sancho amigo, no te dé pena el buscalle, por la que a mí se me
quitará si le hallo.

Y así, picó a Rocinante, y siguióle Sancho con su acostumbrado jumento; y,
habiendo rodeado parte de la montaña, hallaron en un arroyo, caída, muerta
y medio comida de perros y picada de grajos, una mula ensillada y
enfrenada; todo lo cual confirmó en ellos más la sospecha de que aquel que
huía era el dueño de la mula y del cojín.

Estándola mirando, oyeron un silbo como de pastor que guardaba ganado, y a
deshora, a su siniestra mano, parecieron una buena cantidad de cabras, y
tras ellas, por cima de la montaña, pareció el cabrero que las guardaba,
que era un hombre anciano. Diole voces don Quijote, y rogóle que bajase
donde estaban. Él respondió a gritos que quién les había traído por aquel
lugar, pocas o ningunas veces pisado sino de pies de cabras o de lobos y
otras fieras que por allí andaban. Respondióle Sancho que bajase, que de
todo le darían buena cuenta. Bajó el cabrero, y, en llegando adonde don
Quijote estaba, dijo:

-Apostaré que está mirando la mula de alquiler que está muerta en esa
hondonada. Pues a buena fe que ha ya seis meses que está en ese lugar.
Díganme: ¿han topado por ahí a su dueño?

-No hemos topado a nadie -respondió don Quijote-, sino a un cojín y a una
maletilla que no lejos deste lugar hallamos.

-También la hallé yo -respondió el cabrero-, mas nunca la quise alzar ni
llegar a ella, temeroso de algún desmán y de que no me la pidiesen por de
hurto; que es el diablo sotil, y debajo de los pies se levanta allombre
cosa donde tropiece y caya, sin saber cómo ni cómo no.

-Eso mesmo es lo que yo digo -respondió Sancho-: que también la hallé yo, y
no quise llegar a ella con un tiro de piedra; allí la dejé y allí se queda
como se estaba, que no quiero perro con cencerro.

-Decidme, buen hombre -dijo don Quijote-, ¿sabéis vos quién sea el dueño
destas prendas?

-Lo que sabré yo decir -dijo el cabrero- es que «habrá al pie de seis
meses, poco más a menos, que llegó a una majada de pastores, que estará
como tres leguas deste lugar, un mancebo de gentil talle y apostura,
caballero sobre esa mesma mula que ahí está muerta, y con el mesmo cojín y
maleta que decís que hallastes y no tocastes. Preguntónos que cuál parte
desta sierra era la más áspera y escondida; dijímosle que era esta donde
ahora estamos; y es ansí la verdad, porque si entráis media legua más
adentro, quizá no acertaréis a salir; y estoy maravillado de cómo habéis
podido llegar aquí, porque no hay camino ni senda que a este lugar
encamine. Digo, pues, que, en oyendo nuestra respuesta el mancebo, volvió
las riendas y encaminó hacia el lugar donde le señalamos, dejándonos a
todos contentos de su buen talle, y admirados de su demanda y de la priesa
con que le víamos caminar y volverse hacia la sierra; y desde entonces
nunca más le vimos, hasta que desde allí a algunos días salió al camino a
uno de nuestros pastores, y, sin decille nada, se llegó a él y le dio
muchas puñadas y coces, y luego se fue a la borrica del hato y le quitó
cuanto pan y queso en ella traía; y, con estraña ligereza, hecho esto, se
volvió a emboscar en la sierra. Como esto supimos algunos cabreros, le
anduvimos a buscar casi dos días por lo más cerrado desta sierra, al cabo
de los cuales le hallamos metido en el hueco de un grueso y valiente
alcornoque. Salió a nosotros con mucha mansedumbre, ya roto el vestido, y
el rostro disfigurado y tostado del sol, de tal suerte que apenas le
conocíamos, sino que los vestidos, aunque rotos, con la noticia que dellos
teníamos, nos dieron a entender que era el que buscábamos. Saludónos
cortésmente, y en pocas y muy buenas razones nos dijo que no nos
maravillásemos de verle andar de aquella suerte, porque así le convenía
para cumplir cierta penitencia que por sus muchos pecados le había sido
impuesta. Rogámosle que nos dijese quién era, mas nunca lo pudimos acabar
con él. Pedímosle también que, cuando hubiese menester el sustento, sin el
cual no podía pasar, nos dijese dónde le hallaríamos, porque con mucho amor
y cuidado se lo llevaríamos; y que si esto tampoco fuese de su gusto, que,
a lo menos, saliese a pedirlo, y no a quitarlo a los pastores. Agradeció
nuestro ofrecimiento, pidió perdón de los asaltos pasados, y ofreció de
pedillo de allí adelante por amor de Dios, sin dar molestia alguna a nadie.
En cuanto lo que tocaba a la estancia de su habitación, dijo que no tenía
otra que aquella que le ofrecía la ocasión donde le tomaba la noche; y
acabó su plática con un tan tierno llanto, que bien fuéramos de piedra los
que escuchado le habíamos, si en él no le acompañáramos, considerándole
cómo le habíamos visto la vez primera, y cuál le veíamos entonces. Porque,
como tengo dicho, era un muy gentil y agraciado mancebo, y en sus corteses
y concertadas razones mostraba ser bien nacido y muy cortesana persona;
que, puesto que éramos rústicos los que le escuchábamos, su gentileza era
tanta, que bastaba a darse a conocer a la mesma rusticidad. Y, estando en
lo mejor de su plática, paró y enmudecióse; clavó los ojos en el suelo por
un buen espacio, en el cual todos estuvimos quedos y suspensos, esperando
en qué había de parar aquel embelesamiento, con no poca lástima de verlo;
porque, por lo que hacía de abrir los ojos, estar fijo mirando al suelo sin
mover pestaña gran rato, y otras veces cerrarlos, apretando los labios y
enarcando las cejas, fácilmente conocimos que algún accidente de locura le
había sobrevenido. Mas él nos dio a entender presto ser verdad lo que
pensábamos, porque se levantó con gran furia del suelo, donde se había
echado, y arremetió con el primero que halló junto a sí, con tal denuedo y
rabia que, si no se le quitáramos, le matara a puñadas y a bocados; y todo
esto hacía, diciendo: ''¡Ah, fementido Fernando! ¡Aquí, aquí me pagarás la
sinrazón que me heciste: estas manos te sacarán el corazón, donde albergan
y tienen manida todas las maldades juntas, principalmente la fraude y el
engaño!'' Y a éstas añadía otras razones, que todas se encaminaban a decir
mal de aquel Fernando y a tacharle de traidor y fementido. Quitámossele,
pues, con no poca pesadumbre, y él, sin decir más palabra, se apartó de
nosotros y se emboscó corriendo por entre estos jarales y malezas, de modo
que nos imposibilitó el seguille. Por esto conjeturamos que la locura le
venía a tiempos, y que alguno que se llamaba Fernando le debía de haber
hecho alguna mala obra, tan pesada cuanto lo mostraba el término a que le
había conducido. Todo lo cual se ha confirmado después acá con las veces,
que han sido muchas, que él ha salido al camino, unas a pedir a los
pastores le den de lo que llevan para comer y otras a quitárselo por
fuerza; porque cuando está con el accidente de la locura, aunque los
pastores se lo ofrezcan de buen grado, no lo admite, sino que lo toma a
puñadas; y cuando está en su seso, lo pide por amor de Dios, cortés y
comedidamente, y rinde por ello muchas gracias, y no con falta de lágrimas.
Y en verdad os digo, señores -prosiguió el cabrero-, que ayer determinamos
yo y cuatro zagales, los dos criados y los dos amigos míos, de buscarle
hasta tanto que le hallemos, y, después de hallado, ya por fuerza ya por
grado, le hemos de llevar a la villa de Almodóvar, que está de aquí ocho
leguas, y allí le curaremos, si es que su mal tiene cura, o sabremos quién
es cuando esté en sus seso, y si tiene parientes a quien dar noticia de su
desgracia». Esto es, señores, lo que sabré deciros de lo que me habéis
preguntado; y entended que el dueño de las prendas que hallastes es el
mesmo que vistes pasar con tanta ligereza como desnudez -que ya le había
dicho don Quijote cómo había visto pasar aquel hombre saltando por la
sierra.

El cual quedó admirado de lo que al cabrero había oído, y quedó con más
deseo de saber quién era el desdichado loco; y propuso en sí lo mesmo que
ya tenía pensado: de buscalle por toda la montaña, sin dejar rincón ni
cueva en ella que no mirase, hasta hallarle. Pero hízolo mejor la suerte de
lo que él pensaba ni esperaba, porque en aquel mesmo instante pareció, por
entre una quebrada de una sierra que salía donde ellos estaban, el mancebo
que buscaba, el cual venía hablando entre sí cosas que no podían ser
entendidas de cerca, cuanto más de lejos. Su traje era cual se ha pintado,
sólo que, llegando cerca, vio don Quijote que un coleto hecho pedazos que
sobre sí traía era de ámbar; por donde acabó de entender que persona que
tales hábitos traía no debía de ser de ínfima calidad.

En llegando el mancebo a ellos, les saludó con una voz desentonada y
bronca, pero con mucha cortesía. Don Quijote le volvió las saludes con no
menos comedimiento, y, apeándose de Rocinante, con gentil continente y
donaire, le fue a abrazar y le tuvo un buen espacio estrechamente entre sus
brazos, como si de luengos tiempos le hubiera conocido. El otro, a quien
podemos llamar el Roto de la Mala Figura -como a don Quijote el de la
Triste-, después de haberse dejado abrazar, le apartó un poco de sí, y,
puestas sus manos en los hombros de don Quijote, le estuvo mirando, como
que quería ver si le conocía; no menos admirado quizá de ver la figura,
talle y armas de don Quijote, que don Quijote lo estaba de verle a él. En
resolución, el primero que habló después del abrazamiento fue el Roto, y
dijo lo que se dirá adelante.





Capítulo XXIV. Donde se prosigue la aventura de la Sierra Morena


Dice la historia que era grandísima la atención con que don Quijote
escuchaba al astroso Caballero de la Sierra, el cual, prosiguiendo su
plática, dijo:

-Por cierto, señor, quienquiera que seáis, que yo no os conozco, yo os
agradezco las muestras y la cortesía que conmigo habéis usado; y quisiera
yo hallarme en términos que con más que la voluntad pudiera servir la que
habéis mostrado tenerme en el buen acogimiento que me habéis hecho, mas no
quiere mi suerte darme otra cosa con que corresponda a las buenas obras que
me hacen, que buenos deseos de satisfacerlas.

-Los que yo tengo -respondió don Quijote- son de serviros; tanto, que tenía
determinado de no salir destas sierras hasta hallaros y saber de vos si el
dolor que en la estrañeza de vuestra vida mostráis tener se podía hallar
algún género de remedio; y si fuera menester buscarle, buscarle con la
diligencia posible. Y, cuando vuestra desventura fuera de aquellas que
tienen cerradas las puertas a todo género de consuelo, pensaba ayudaros a
llorarla y plañirla como mejor pudiera, que todavía es consuelo en las
desgracias hallar quien se duela dellas. Y, si es que mi buen intento
merece ser agradecido con algún género de cortesía, yo os suplico, señor,
por la mucha que veo que en vos se encierra, y juntamente os conjuro por la
cosa que en esta vida más habéis amado o amáis, que me digáis quién sois y
la causa que os ha traído a vivir y a morir entre estas soledades como
bruto animal, pues moráis entre ellos tan ajeno de vos mismo cual lo
muestra vuestro traje y persona. Y juro -añadió don Quijote-, por la orden
de caballería que recebí, aunque indigno y pecador, y por la profesión de
caballero andante, que si en esto, señor, me complacéis, de serviros con
las veras a que me obliga el ser quien soy: ora remediando vuestra
desgracia, si tiene remedio, ora ayudándoos a llorarla, como os lo he
prometido.

El Caballero del Bosque, que de tal manera oyó hablar al de la Triste
Figura, no hacía sino mirarle, y remirarle y tornarle a mirar de arriba
abajo; y, después que le hubo bien mirado, le dijo:

-Si tienen algo que darme a comer, por amor de Dios que me lo den; que,
después de haber comido, yo haré todo lo que se me manda, en agradecimiento
de tan buenos deseos como aquí se me han mostrado.

Luego sacaron, Sancho de su costal y el cabrero de su zurrón, con que
satisfizo el Roto su hambre, comiendo lo que le dieron como persona
atontada, tan apriesa que no daba espacio de un bocado al otro, pues antes
los engullía que tragaba; y, en tanto que comía, ni él ni los que le
miraban hablaban palabra. Como acabó de comer, les hizo de señas que le
siguiesen, como lo hicieron, y él los llevó a un verde pradecillo que a la
vuelta de una peña poco desviada de allí estaba. En llegando a él se tendió
en el suelo, encima de la yerba, y los demás hicieron lo mismo; y todo esto
sin que ninguno hablase, hasta que el Roto, después de haberse acomodado en
su asiento, dijo:

-Si gustáis, señores, que os diga en breves razones la inmensidad de mis
desventuras, habéisme de prometer de que con ninguna pregunta, ni otra
cosa, no interromperéis el hilo de mi triste historia; porque en el punto
que lo hagáis, en ése se quedará lo que fuere contando.

Estas razones del Roto trujeron a la memoria a don Quijote el cuento que le
había contado su escudero, cuando no acertó el número de las cabras que
habían pasado el río y se quedó la historia pendiente. Pero, volviendo al
Roto, prosiguió diciendo:

-Esta prevención que hago es porque querría pasar brevemente por el cuento
de mis desgracias; que el traerlas a la memoria no me sirve de otra cosa
que añadir otras de nuevo, y, mientras menos me preguntáredes, más presto
acabaré yo de decillas, puesto que no dejaré por contar cosa alguna que sea
de importancia para no satisfacer del todo a vuestro deseo.

Don Quijote se lo prometió, en nombre de los demás, y él, con este seguro,
comenzó desta manera:

-«Mi nombre es Cardenio; mi patria, una ciudad de las mejores desta
Andalucía; mi linaje, noble; mis padres, ricos; mi desventura, tanta que la
deben de haber llorado mis padres y sentido mi linaje, sin poderla aliviar
con su riqueza; que para remediar desdichas del cielo poco suelen valer los
bienes de fortuna. Vivía en esta mesma tierra un cielo, donde puso el amor
toda la gloria que yo acertara a desearme: tal es la hermosura de Luscinda,
doncella tan noble y tan rica como yo, pero de más ventura y de menos
firmeza de la que a mis honrados pensamientos se debía. A esta Luscinda
amé, quise y adoré desde mis tiernos y primeros años, y ella me quiso a mí
con aquella sencillez y buen ánimo que su poca edad permitía. Sabían
nuestros padres nuestros intentos, y no les pesaba dello, porque bien veían
que, cuando pasaran adelante, no podían tener otro fin que el de casarnos,
cosa que casi la concertaba la igualdad de nuestro linaje y riquezas.
Creció la edad, y con ella el amor de entrambos, que al padre de Luscinda
le pareció que por buenos respetos estaba obligado a negarme la entrada de
su casa, casi imitando en esto a los padres de aquella Tisbe tan decantada
de los poetas. Y fue esta negación añadir llama a llama y deseo a deseo,
porque, aunque pusieron silencio a las lenguas, no le pudieron poner a las
plumas, las cuales, con más libertad que las lenguas, suelen dar a entender
a quien quieren lo que en el alma está encerrado; que muchas veces la
presencia de la cosa amada turba y enmudece la intención más determinada y
la lengua más atrevida. ¡Ay cielos, y cuántos billetes le escribí! ¡Cuán
regaladas y honestas respuestas tuve! ¡Cuántas canciones compuse y cuántos
enamorados versos, donde el alma declaraba y trasladaba sus sentimientos,
pintaba sus encendidos deseos, entretenía sus memorias y recreaba su
voluntad!

»En efeto, viéndome apurado, y que mi alma se consumía con el deseo de
verla, determiné poner por obra y acabar en un punto lo que me pareció que
más convenía para salir con mi deseado y merecido premio; y fue el
pedírsela a su padre por legítima esposa, como lo hice; a lo que él me
respondió que me agradecía la voluntad que mostraba de honralle, y de
querer honrarme con prendas suyas, pero que, siendo mi padre vivo, a él
tocaba de justo derecho hacer aquella demanda; porque, si no fuese con
mucha voluntad y gusto suyo, no era Luscinda mujer para tomarse ni darse a
hurto.

»Yo le agradecí su buen intento, pareciéndome que llevaba razón en lo que
decía, y que mi padre vendría en ello como yo se lo dijese; y con este
intento, luego en aquel mismo instante, fui a decirle a mi padre lo que
deseaba. Y, al tiempo que entré en un aposento donde estaba, le hallé con
una carta abierta en la mano, la cual, antes que yo le dijese palabra, me
la dio y me dijo: ''Por esa carta verás, Cardenio, la voluntad que el duque
Ricardo tiene de hacerte merced''.» Este duque Ricardo, como ya vosotros,
señores, debéis de saber, es un grande de España que tiene su estado en lo
mejor desta Andalucía. «Tomé y leí la carta, la cual venía tan encarecida
que a mí mesmo me pareció mal si mi padre dejaba de cumplir lo que en ella
se le pedía, que era que me enviase luego donde él estaba; que quería que
fuese compañero, no criado, de su hijo el mayor, y que él tomaba a cargo el
ponerme en estado que correspondiese a la estimación en que me tenía. Leí
la carta y enmudecí leyéndola, y más cuando oí que mi padre me decía: ''De
aquí a dos días te partirás, Cardenio, a hacer la voluntad del duque; y da
gracias a Dios que te va abriendo camino por donde alcances lo que yo sé
que mereces''. Añadió a éstas otras razones de padre consejero.
»Llegóse el término de mi partida, hablé una noche a Luscinda, díjele todo
lo que pasaba, y lo mesmo hice a su padre, suplicándole se entretuviese
algunos días y dilatase el darle estado hasta que yo viese lo que Ricardo
me quería. Él me lo prometió y ella me lo confirmó con mil juramentos y mil
desmayos. Vine, en fin, donde el duque Ricardo estaba. Fui dél tan bien
recebido y tratado, que desde luego comenzó la envidia a hacer su oficio,
teniéndomela los criados antiguos, pareciéndoles que las muestras que el
duque daba de hacerme merced habían de ser en perjuicio suyo. Pero el que
más se holgó con mi ida fue un hijo segundo del duque, llamado Fernando,
mozo gallardo, gentilhombre, liberal y enamorado, el cual, en poco tiempo,
quiso que fuese tan su amigo, que daba que decir a todos; y, aunque el
mayor me quería bien y me hacía merced, no llegó al estremo con que don
Fernando me quería y trataba.

»Es, pues, el caso que, como entre los amigos no hay cosa secreta que no se
comunique, y la privanza que yo tenía con don Fernando dejada de serlo por
ser amistad, todos sus pensamientos me declaraba, especialmente uno
enamorado, que le traía con un poco de desasosiego. Quería bien a una
labradora, vasalla de su padre (y ella los tenía muy ricos), y era tan
hermosa, recatada, discreta y honesta que nadie que la conocía se
determinaba en cuál destas cosas tuviese más excelencia ni más se
aventajase. Estas tan buenas partes de la hermosa labradora redujeron a tal
término los deseos de don Fernando, que se determinó, para poder alcanzarlo
y conquistar la entereza de la labradora, darle palabra de ser su esposo,
porque de otra manera era procurar lo imposible. Yo, obligado de su
amistad, con las mejores razones que supe y con los más vivos ejemplos que
pude, procuré estorbarle y apartarle de tal propósito. Pero, viendo que no
aprovechaba, determiné de decirle el caso al duque Ricardo, su padre. Mas
don Fernando, como astuto y discreto, se receló y temió desto, por
parecerle que estaba yo obligado, en vez de buen criado, no tener
encubierta cosa que tan en perjuicio de la honra de mi señor el duque
venía; y así, por divertirme y engañarme, me dijo que no hallaba otro mejor
remedio para poder apartar de la memoria la hermosura que tan sujeto le
tenía, que el ausentarse por algunos meses; y que quería que el ausencia
fuese que los dos nos viniésemos en casa de mi padre, con ocasión que
darían al duque que venía a ver y a feriar unos muy buenos caballos que en
mi ciudad había, que es madre de los mejores del mundo.

»Apenas le oí yo decir esto, cuando, movido de mi afición, aunque su
determinación no fuera tan buena, la aprobara yo por una de las más
acertadas que se podían imaginar, por ver cuán buena ocasión y coyuntura se
me ofrecía de volver a ver a mi Luscinda. Con este pensamiento y deseo,
aprobé su parecer y esforcé su propósito, diciéndole que lo pusiese por
obra con la brevedad posible, porque, en efeto, la ausencia hacía su
oficio, a pesar de los más firmes pensamientos. Ya cuando él me vino a
decir esto, según después se supo, había gozado a la labradora con título
de esposo, y esperaba ocasión de descubrirse a su salvo, temeroso de lo que
el duque su padre haría cuando supiese su disparate.

»Sucedió, pues, que, como el amor en los mozos, por la mayor parte, no lo
es, sino apetito, el cual, como tiene por último fin el deleite, en
llegando a alcanzarle se acaba y ha de volver atrás aquello que parecía
amor, porque no puede pasar adelante del término que le puso naturaleza, el
cual término no le puso a lo que es verdadero amor...; quiero decir que,
así como don Fernando gozó a la labradora, se le aplacaron sus deseos y se
resfriaron sus ahíncos; y si primero fingía quererse ausentar, por
remediarlos, ahora de veras procuraba irse, por no ponerlos en ejecución.
Diole el duque licencia, y mandóme que le acompañase. Venimos a mi ciudad,
recibióle mi padre como quien era; vi yo luego a Luscinda, tornaron a
vivir, aunque no habían estado muertos ni amortiguados, mis deseos, de los
cuales di cuenta, por mi mal, a don Fernando, por parecerme que, en la ley
de la mucha amistad que mostraba, no le debía encubrir nada. Alabéle la
hermosura, donaire y discreción de Luscinda de tal manera, que mis
alabanzas movieron en él los deseos de querer ver doncella de tantas buenas
partes adornada. Cumplíselos yo, por mi corta suerte, enseñándosela una
noche, a la luz de una vela, por una ventana por donde los dos solíamos
hablarnos. Viola en sayo, tal, que todas las bellezas hasta entonces por él
vistas las puso en olvido. Enmudeció, perdió el sentido, quedó absorto y,
finalmente, tan enamorado cual lo veréis en el discurso del cuento de mi
desventura. Y, para encenderle más el deseo, que a mí me celaba y al cielo
a solas descubría, quiso la fortuna que hallase un día un billete suyo
pidiéndome que la pidiese a su padre por esposa, tan discreto, tan honesto
y tan enamorado que, en leyéndolo, me dijo que en sola Luscinda se
encerraban todas las gracias de hermosura y de entendimiento que en las
demás mujeres del mundo estaban repartidas.

»Bien es verdad que quiero confesar ahora que, puesto que yo veía con cuán
justas causas don Fernando a Luscinda alababa, me pesaba de oír aquellas
alabanzas de su boca, y comencé a temer y a recelarme dél, porque no se
pasaba momento donde no quisiese que tratásemos de Luscinda, y él movía la
plática, aunque la trujese por los cabellos; cosa que despertaba en mí un
no sé qué de celos, no porque yo temiese revés alguno de la bondad y de la
fe de Luscinda, pero, con todo eso, me hacía temer mi suerte lo mesmo que
ella me aseguraba. Procuraba siempre don Fernando leer los papeles que yo a
Luscinda enviaba y los que ella me respondía, a título que de la discreción
de los dos gustaba mucho. Acaeció, pues, que, habiéndome pedido Luscinda un
libro de caballerías en que leer, de quien era ella muy aficionada, que era
el de Amadís de Gaula...»

No hubo bien oído don Quijote nombrar libro de caballerías, cuando dijo:
-Con que me dijera vuestra merced, al principio de su historia, que su
merced de la señora Luscinda era aficionada a libros de caballerías, no
fuera menester otra exageración para darme a entender la alteza de su
entendimiento, porque no le tuviera tan bueno como vos, señor, le habéis
pintado, si careciera del gusto de tan sabrosa leyenda: así que, para
conmigo, no es menester gastar más palabras en declararme su hermosura,
valor y entendimiento; que, con sólo haber entendido su afición, la
confirmo por la más hermosa y más discreta mujer del mundo. Y quisiera yo,
señor, que vuestra merced le hubiera enviado junto con Amadís de Gaula al
bueno de Don Rugel de Grecia, que yo sé que gustara la señora Luscinda
mucho de Daraida y Geraya, y de las discreciones del pastor Darinel y de
aquellos admirables versos de sus bucólicas, cantadas y representadas por
él con todo donaire, discreción y desenvoltura. Pero tiempo podrá venir en
que se enmiende esa falta, y no dura más en hacerse la enmienda de cuanto
quiera vuestra merced ser servido de venirse conmigo a mi aldea, que allí
le podré dar más de trecientos libros, que son el regalo de mi alma y el
entretenimiento de mi vida; aunque tengo para mí que ya no tengo ninguno,
merced a la malicia de malos y envidiosos encantadores. Y perdóneme vuestra
merced el haber contravenido a lo que prometimos de no interromper su
plática, pues, en oyendo cosas de caballerías y de caballeros andantes, así
es en mi mano dejar de hablar en ellos, como lo es en la de los rayos del
sol dejar de calentar, ni humedecer en los de la luna. Así que, perdón y
proseguir, que es lo que ahora hace más al caso.

En tanto que don Quijote estaba diciendo lo que queda dicho, se le había
caído a Cardenio la cabeza sobre el pecho, dando muestras de estar
profundamente pensativo. Y, puesto que dos veces le dijo don Quijote que
prosiguiese su historia, ni alzaba la cabeza ni respondía palabra; pero, al
cabo de un buen espacio, la levantó y dijo:

-No se me puede quitar del pensamiento, ni habrá quien me lo quite en el
mundo, ni quien me dé a entender otra cosa (y sería un majadero el que lo
contrario entendiese o creyese), sino que aquel bellaconazo del maestro
Elisabat estaba amancebado con la reina Madésima.

-Eso no, ¡voto a tal! -respondió con mucha cólera don Quijote (y arrojóle,
como tenía de costumbre)-; y ésa es una muy gran malicia, o bellaquería,
por mejor decir: la reina Madásima fue muy principal señora, y no se ha de
presumir que tan alta princesa se había de amancebar con un sacapotras; y
quien lo contrario entendiere, miente como muy gran bellaco. Y yo se lo
daré a entender, a pie o a caballo, armado o desarmado, de noche o de día,
o como más gusto le diere.

Estábale mirando Cardenio muy atentamente, al cual ya había venido el
accidente de su locura y no estaba para proseguir su historia; ni tampoco
don Quijote se la oyera, según le había disgustado lo que de Madásima le
había oído. ¡Estraño caso; que así volvió por ella como si verdaderamente
fuera su verdadera y natural señora: tal le tenían sus descomulgados
libros! Digo, pues, que, como ya Cardenio estaba loco y se oyó tratar de
mentís y de bellaco, con otros denuestos semejantes, parecióle mal la
burla, y alzó un guijarro que halló junto a sí, y dio con él en los pechos
tal golpe a don Quijote que le hizo caer de espaldas. Sancho Panza, que de
tal modo vio parar a su señor, arremetió al loco con el puño cerrado; y el
Roto le recibió de tal suerte que con una puñada dio con él a sus pies, y
luego se subió sobre él y le brumó las costillas muy a su sabor. El
cabrero, que le quiso defender, corrió el mesmo peligro. Y, después que los
tuvo a todos rendidos y molidos, los dejó y se fue, con gentil sosiego, a
emboscarse en la montaña.

Levantóse Sancho, y, con la rabia que tenía de verse aporreado tan sin
merecerlo, acudió a tomar la venganza del cabrero, diciéndole que él tenía
la culpa de no haberles avisado que a aquel hombre le tomaba a tiempos la
locura; que, si esto supieran, hubieran estado sobre aviso para poderse
guardar. Respondió el cabrero que ya lo había dicho, y que si él no lo
había oído, que no era suya la culpa. Replicó Sancho Panza, y tornó a
replicar el cabrero, y fue el fin de las réplicas asirse de las barbas y
darse tales puñadas que, si don Quijote no los pusiera en paz, se hicieran
pedazos. Decía Sancho, asido con el cabrero:

-Déjeme vuestra merced, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, que en éste,
que es villano como yo y no está armado caballero, bien puedo a mi salvo
satisfacerme del agravio que me ha hecho, peleando con él mano a mano, como
hombre honrado.

-Así es -dijo don Quijote-, pero yo sé que él no tiene ninguna culpa de lo
sucedido.

Con esto los apaciguó, y don Quijote volvió a preguntar al cabrero si sería
posible hallar a Cardenio, porque quedaba con grandísimo deseo de saber el
fin de su historia. Díjole el cabrero lo que primero le había dicho, que
era no saber de cierto su manida; pero que, si anduviese mucho por aquellos
contornos, no dejaría de hallarle, o cuerdo o loco.





Capítulo XXV. Que trata de las estrañas cosas que en Sierra Morena
sucedieron al valiente caballero de la Mancha, y de la imitación que hizo a
la penitencia de Beltenebros


Despidióse del cabrero don Quijote, y, subiendo otra vez sobre Rocinante,
mandó a Sancho que le siguiese, el cual lo hizo, con su jumento, de muy
mala gana. Íbanse poco a poco entrando en lo más áspero de la montaña, y
Sancho iba muerto por razonar con su amo, y deseaba que él comenzase la
plática, por no contravenir a lo que le tenía mandado; mas, no pudiendo
sufrir tanto silencio, le dijo:

-Señor don Quijote, vuestra merced me eche su bendición y me dé licencia;
que desde aquí me quiero volver a mi casa, y a mi mujer y a mis hijos, con
los cuales, por lo menos, hablaré y departiré todo lo que quisiere; porque
querer vuestra merced que vaya con él por estas soledades, de día y de
noche, y que no le hable cuando me diere gusto es enterrarme en vida. Si ya
quisiera la suerte que los animales hablaran, como hablaban en tiempos de
Guisopete, fuera menos mal, porque departiera yo con mi jumento lo que me
viniera en gana, y con esto pasara mi mala ventura; que es recia cosa, y
que no se puede llevar en paciencia, andar buscando aventuras toda la vida
y no hallar sino coces y manteamientos, ladrillazos y puñadas, y, con todo
esto, nos hemos de coser la boca, sin osar decir lo que el hombre tiene en
su corazón, como si fuera mudo.

-Ya te entiendo, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-: tú mueres porque te alce
el entredicho que te tengo puesto en la lengua. Dale por alzado y di lo que
quisieres, con condición que no ha de durar este alzamiento más de en
cuanto anduviéremos por estas sierras.

-Sea ansí -dijo Sancho-: hable yo ahora, que después Dios sabe lo que será;
y, comenzando a gozar de ese salvoconduto, digo que ¿qué le iba a vuestra
merced en volver tanto por aquella reina Magimasa, o como se llama? O, ¿qué
hacía al caso que aquel abad fuese su amigo o no? Que, si vuestra merced
pasara con ello, pues no era su juez, bien creo yo que el loco pasara
adelante con su historia, y se hubieran ahorrado el golpe del guijarro, y
las coces, y aun más de seis torniscones.

-A fe, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que si tú supieras, como yo lo sé,
cuán honrada y cuán principal señora era la reina Madásima, yo sé que
dijeras que tuve mucha paciencia, pues no quebré la boca por donde tales
blasfemias salieron; porque es muy gran blasfemia decir ni pensar que una
reina esté amancebada con un cirujano. La verdad del cuento es que aquel
maestro Elisabat, que el loco dijo, fue un hombre muy prudente y de muy
sanos consejos, y sirvió de ayo y de médico a la reina; pero pensar que
ella era su amiga es disparate digno de muy gran castigo. Y, porque veas
que Cardenio no supo lo que dijo, has de advertir que cuando lo dijo ya
estaba sin juicio.

-Eso digo yo -dijo Sancho-: que no había para qué hacer cuenta de las
palabras de un loco, porque si la buena suerte no ayudara a vuestra merced
y encaminara el guijarro a la cabeza, como le encaminó al pecho, buenos
quedáramos por haber vuelto por aquella mi señora, que Dios cohonda. Pues,
¡montas que no se librara Cardenio por loco!

-Contra cuerdos y contra locos está obligado cualquier caballero andante a
volver por la honra de las mujeres, cualesquiera que sean, cuanto más por
las reinas de tan alta guisa y pro como fue la reina Madásima, a quien yo
tengo particular afición por sus buenas partes; porque, fuera de haber sido
fermosa, además fue muy prudente y muy sufrida en sus calamidades, que las
tuvo muchas; y los consejos y compañía del maestro Elisabat le fue y le
fueron de mucho provecho y alivio para poder llevar sus trabajos con
prudencia y paciencia. Y de aquí tomó ocasión el vulgo ignorante y mal
intencionado de decir y pensar que ella era su manceba; y mienten, digo
otra vez, y mentirán otras docientas, todos los que tal pensaren y dijeren.
-Ni yo lo digo ni lo pienso -respondió Sancho-: allá se lo hayan; con su
pan se lo coman. Si fueron amancebados, o no, a Dios habrán dado la cuenta.
De mis viñas vengo, no sé nada; no soy amigo de saber vidas ajenas; que el
que compra y miente, en su bolsa lo siente. Cuanto más, que desnudo nací,
desnudo me hallo: ni pierdo ni gano; mas que lo fuesen, ¿qué me va a mí? Y
muchos piensan que hay tocinos y no hay estacas. Mas, ¿quién puede poner
puertas al campo? Cuanto más, que de Dios dijeron.

-¡Válame Dios -dijo don Quijote-, y qué de necedades vas, Sancho,
ensartando! ¿Qué va de lo que tratamos a los refranes que enhilas? Por tu
vida, Sancho, que calles; y de aquí adelante, entremétete en espolear a tu
asno, y deja de hacello en lo que no te importa. Y entiende con todos tus
cinco sentidos que todo cuanto yo he hecho, hago e hiciere, va muy puesto
en razón y muy conforme a las reglas de caballería, que las sé mejor que
cuantos caballeros las profesaron en el mundo.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, y ¿es buena regla de caballería que andemos
perdidos por estas montañas, sin senda ni camino, buscando a un loco, el
cual, después de hallado, quizá le vendrá en voluntad de acabar lo que dejó
comenzado, no de su cuento, sino de la cabeza de vuestra merced y de mis
costillas, acabándonoslas de romper de todo punto?

-Calla, te digo otra vez, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-; porque te hago saber
que no sólo me trae por estas partes el deseo de hallar al loco, cuanto el
que tengo de hacer en ellas una hazaña con que he de ganar perpetuo nombre
y fama en todo lo descubierto de la tierra; y será tal, que he de echar con
ella el sello a todo aquello que puede hacer perfecto y famoso a un andante
caballero.

-Y ¿es de muy gran peligro esa hazaña? -preguntó Sancho Panza.

-No -respondió el de la Triste Figura-, puesto que de tal manera podía
correr el dado, que echásemos azar en lugar de encuentro; pero todo ha de
estar en tu diligencia.

-¿En mi diligencia? -dijo Sancho.

-Sí -dijo don Quijote-, porque si vuelves presto de adonde pienso enviarte,
presto se acabará mi pena y presto comenzará mi gloria. Y, porque no es
bien que te tenga más suspenso, esperando en lo que han de parar mis
razones, quiero, Sancho, que sepas que el famoso Amadís de Gaula fue uno de
los más perfectos caballeros andantes. No he dicho bien fue uno: fue el
solo, el primero, el único, el señor de todos cuantos hubo en su tiempo en
el mundo. Mal año y mal mes para don Belianís y para todos aquellos que
dijeren que se le igualó en algo, porque se engañan, juro cierto. Digo
asimismo que, cuando algún pintor quiere salir famoso en su arte, procura
imitar los originales de los más únicos pintores que sabe; y esta mesma
regla corre por todos los más oficios o ejercicios de cuenta que sirven
para adorno de las repúblicas. Y así lo ha de hacer y hace el que quiere
alcanzar nombre de prudente y sufrido, imitando a Ulises, en cuya persona y
trabajos nos pinta Homero un retrato vivo de prudencia y de sufrimiento;
como también nos mostró Virgilio, en persona de Eneas, el valor de un hijo
piadoso y la sagacidad de un valiente y entendido capitán, no pintándolo ni
descubriéndolo como ellos fueron, sino como habían de ser, para quedar
ejemplo a los venideros hombres de sus virtudes. Desta mesma suerte, Amadís
fue el norte, el lucero, el sol de los valientes y enamorados caballeros, a
quien debemos de imitar todos aquellos que debajo de la bandera de amor y
de la caballería militamos. Siendo, pues, esto ansí, como lo es, hallo yo,
Sancho amigo, que el caballero andante que más le imitare estará más cerca
de alcanzar la perfeción de la caballería. Y una de las cosas en que más
este caballero mostró su prudencia, valor, valentía, sufrimiento, firmeza y
amor, fue cuando se retiró, desdeñado de la señora Oriana, a hacer
penitencia en la Peña Pobre, mudado su nombre en el de Beltenebros, nombre,
por cierto, significativo y proprio para la vida que él de su voluntad
había escogido. Ansí que, me es a mí más fácil imitarle en esto que no en
hender gigantes, descabezar serpientes, matar endriagos, desbaratar
ejércitos, fracasar armadas y deshacer encantamentos. Y, pues estos lugares
son tan acomodados para semejantes efectos, no hay para qué se deje pasar
la ocasión, que ahora con tanta comodidad me ofrece sus guedejas.

-En efecto -dijo Sancho-, ¿qué es lo que vuestra merced quiere hacer en
este tan remoto lugar?

-¿Ya no te he dicho -respondió don Quijote- que quiero imitar a Amadís,
haciendo aquí del desesperado, del sandio y del furioso, por imitar
juntamente al valiente don Roldán, cuando halló en una fuente las señales
de que Angélica la Bella había cometido vileza con Medoro, de cuya
pesadumbre se volvió loco y arrancó los árboles, enturbió las aguas de las
claras fuentes, mató pastores, destruyó ganados, abrasó chozas, derribó
casas, arrastró yeguas y hizo otras cien mil insolencias, dignas de eterno
nombre y escritura? Y, puesto que yo no pienso imitar a Roldán, o Orlando,
o Rotolando (que todos estos tres nombres tenía), parte por parte en todas
las locuras que hizo, dijo y pensó, haré el bosquejo, como mejor pudiere,
en las que me pareciere ser más esenciales. Y podrá ser que viniese a
contentarme con sola la imitación de Amadís, que sin hacer locuras de daño,
sino de lloros y sentimientos, alcanzó tanta fama como el que más.
-Paréceme a mí -dijo Sancho- que los caballeros que lo tal ficieron fueron
provocados y tuvieron causa para hacer esas necedades y penitencias, pero
vuestra merced, ¿qué causa tiene para volverse loco? ¿Qué dama le ha
desdeñado, o qué señales ha hallado que le den a entender que la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso ha hecho alguna niñería con moro o cristiano?

-Ahí esta el punto -respondió don Quijote- y ésa es la fineza de mi
negocio; que volverse loco un caballero andante con causa, ni grado ni
gracias: el toque está desatinar sin ocasión y dar a entender a mi dama que
si en seco hago esto, ¿qué hiciera en mojado? Cuanto más, que harta ocasión
tengo en la larga ausencia que he hecho de la siempre señora mía Dulcinea
del Toboso; que, como ya oíste decir a aquel pastor de marras, Ambrosio:
quien está ausente todos los males tiene y teme. Así que, Sancho amigo, no
gastes tiempo en aconsejarme que deje tan rara, tan felice y tan no vista
imitación. Loco soy, loco he de ser hasta tanto que tú vuelvas con la
respuesta de una carta que contigo pienso enviar a mi señora Dulcinea; y si
fuere tal cual a mi fe se le debe, acabarse ha mi sandez y mi penitencia; y
si fuere al contrario, seré loco de veras, y, siéndolo, no sentiré nada.
Ansí que, de cualquiera manera que responda, saldré del conflito y trabajo
en que me dejares, gozando el bien que me trujeres, por cuerdo, o no
sintiendo el mal que me aportares, por loco. Pero dime, Sancho, ¿traes bien
guardado el yelmo de Mambrino?; que ya vi que le alzaste del suelo cuando
aquel desagradecido le quiso hacer pedazos. Pero no pudo, donde se puede
echar de ver la fineza de su temple.

A lo cual respondió Sancho:

-Vive Dios, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, que no puedo sufrir ni
llevar en paciencia algunas cosas que vuestra merced dice, y que por ellas
vengo a imaginar que todo cuanto me dice de caballerías y de alcanzar
reinos e imperios, de dar ínsulas y de hacer otras mercedes y grandezas,
como es uso de caballeros andantes, que todo debe de ser cosa de viento y
mentira, y todo pastraña, o patraña, o como lo llamáremos. Porque quien
oyere decir a vuestra merced que una bacía de barbero es el yelmo de
Mambrino, y que no salga de este error en más de cuatro días, ¿qué ha de
pensar, sino que quien tal dice y afirma debe de tener güero el juicio? La
bacía yo la llevo en el costal, toda abollada, y llévola para aderezarla en
mi casa y hacerme la barba en ella, si Dios me diere tanta gracia que algún
día me vea con mi mujer y hijos.

-Mira, Sancho, por el mismo que denantes juraste, te juro -dijo don
Quijote- que tienes el más corto entendimiento que tiene ni tuvo escudero
en el mundo. ¿Que es posible que en cuanto ha que andas conmigo no has
echado de ver que todas las cosas de los caballeros andantes parecen
quimeras, necedades y desatinos, y que son todas hechas al revés? Y no
porque sea ello ansí, sino porque andan entre nosotros siempre una caterva
de encantadores que todas nuestras cosas mudan y truecan y les vuelven
según su gusto, y según tienen la gana de favorecernos o destruirnos; y
así, eso que a ti te parece bacía de barbero, me parece a mí el yelmo de
Mambrino, y a otro le parecerá otra cosa. Y fue rara providencia del sabio
que es de mi parte hacer que parezca bacía a todos lo que real y
verdaderamente es yelmo de Mambrino, a causa que, siendo él de tanta
estima, todo el mundo me perseguirá por quitármele; pero, como ven que no
es más de un bacín de barbero, no se curan de procuralle, como se mostró
bien en el que quiso rompelle y le dejó en el suelo sin llevarle; que a fe
que si le conociera, que nunca él le dejara. Guárdale, amigo, que por ahora
no le he menester; que antes me tengo de quitar todas estas armas y quedar
desnudo como cuando nací, si es que me da en voluntad de seguir en mi
penitencia más a Roldán que a Amadís.

Llegaron, en estas pláticas, al pie de una alta montaña que, casi como
peñón tajado, estaba sola entre otras muchas que la rodeaban. Corría por su
falda un manso arroyuelo, y hacíase por toda su redondez un prado tan verde
y vicioso, que daba contento a los ojos que le miraban. Había por allí
muchos árboles silvestres y algunas plantas y flores, que hacían el lugar
apacible. Este sitio escogió el Caballero de la Triste Figura para hacer su
penitencia; y así, en viéndole, comenzó a decir en voz alta, como si
estuviera sin juicio:

-Éste es el lugar, ¡oh cielos!, que diputo y escojo para llorar la
desventura en que vosotros mesmos me habéis puesto. Éste es el sitio donde
el humor de mis ojos acrecentará las aguas deste pequeño arroyo, y mis
continos y profundos sospiros moverán a la contina las hojas destos
montaraces árboles, en testimonio y señal de la pena que mi asendereado
corazón padece. ¡Oh vosotros, quienquiera que seáis, rústicos dioses que en
este inhabitable lugar tenéis vuestra morada, oíd las quejas deste
desdichado amante, a quien una luenga ausencia y unos imaginados celos han
traído a lamentarse entre estas asperezas, y a quejarse de la dura
condición de aquella ingrata y bella, término y fin de toda humana
hermosura! ¡Oh vosotras, napeas y dríadas, que tenéis por costumbre de
habitar en las espesuras de los montes, así los ligeros y lascivos sátiros,
de quien sois, aunque en vano, amadas, no perturben jamás vuestro dulce
sosiego, que me ayudéis a lamentar mi desventura, o, a lo menos, no os
canséis de oílla! ¡Oh Dulcinea del Toboso, día de mi noche, gloria de mi
pena, norte de mis caminos, estrella de mi ventura, así el cielo te la dé
buena en cuanto acertares a pedirle, que consideres el lugar y el estado a
que tu ausencia me ha conducido, y que con buen término correspondas al que
a mi fe se le debe! ¡Oh solitarios árboles, que desde hoy en adelante
habéis de hacer compañía a mi soledad, dad indicio, con el blando
movimiento de vuestras ramas, que no os desagrade mi presencia! ¡Oh tú,
escudero mío, agradable compañero en más prósperos y adversos sucesos, toma
bien en la memoria lo que aquí me verás hacer, para que lo cuentes y
recetes a la causa total de todo ello!

Y, diciendo esto, se apeó de Rocinante, y en un momento le quitó el freno y
la silla; y, dándole una palmada en las ancas, le dijo:

-Libertad te da el que sin ella queda, ¡oh caballo tan estremado por tus
obras cuan desdichado por tu suerte! Vete por do quisieres, que en la
frente llevas escrito que no te igualó en ligereza el Hipogrifo de Astolfo,
ni el nombrado Frontino, que tan caro le costó a Bradamante.

Viendo esto Sancho, dijo:

-Bien haya quien nos quitó ahora del trabajo de desenalbardar al rucio; que
a fe que no faltaran palmadicas que dalle, ni cosas que decille en su
alabanza; pero si él aquí estuviera, no consintiera yo que nadie le
desalbardara, pues no había para qué, que a él no le tocaban las generales
de enamorado ni de desesperado, pues no lo estaba su amo, que era yo,
cuando Dios quería. Y en verdad, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, que
si es que mi partida y su locura de vuestra merced va de veras, que será
bien tornar a ensillar a Rocinante, para que supla la falta del rucio,
porque será ahorrar tiempo a mi ida y vuelta; que si la hago a pie, no sé
cuándo llegaré ni cuándo volveré, porque, en resolución, soy mal caminante.
-Digo, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que sea como tú quisieres, que no me
parece mal tu designio; y digo que de aquí a tres días te partirás, porque
quiero que en este tiempo veas lo que por ella hago y digo, para que se lo
digas.

-Pues, ¿qué más tengo de ver -dijo Sancho- que lo que he visto?

-¡Bien estás en el cuento! -respondió don Quijote-. Ahora me falta rasgar
las vestiduras, esparcir las armas y darme de calabazadas por estas peñas,
con otras cosas deste jaez que te han de admirar.

-Por amor de Dios -dijo Sancho-, que mire vuestra merced cómo se da esas
calabazadas; que a tal peña podrá llegar, y en tal punto, que con la
primera se acabase la máquina desta penitencia; y sería yo de parecer que,
ya que vuestra merced le parece que son aquí necesarias calabazadas y que
no se puede hacer esta obra sin ellas, se contentase, pues todo esto es
fingido y cosa contrahecha y de burla, se contentase, digo, con dárselas en
el agua, o en alguna cosa blanda, como algodón; y déjeme a mí el cargo, que
yo diré a mi señora que vuestra merced se las daba en una punta de peña más
dura que la de un diamante.

-Yo agradezco tu buena intención, amigo Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, mas
quiérote hacer sabidor de que todas estas cosas que hago no son de burlas,
sino muy de veras; porque de otra manera, sería contravenir a las órdenes
de caballería, que nos mandan que no digamos mentira alguna, pena de
relasos, y el hacer una cosa por otra lo mesmo es que mentir. Ansí que, mis
calabazadas han de ser verdaderas, firmes y valederas, sin que lleven nada
del sofístico ni del fantástico. Y será necesario que me dejes algunas
hilas para curarme, pues que la ventura quiso que nos faltase el bálsamo
que perdimos.

-Más fue perder el asno -respondió Sancho-, pues se perdieron en él las
hilas y todo. Y ruégole a vuestra merced que no se acuerde más de aquel
maldito brebaje; que en sólo oírle mentar se me revuelve el alma, no que el
estómago. Y más le ruego: que haga cuenta que son ya pasados los tres días
que me ha dado de término para ver las locuras que hace, que ya las doy por
vistas y por pasadas en cosa juzgada, y diré maravillas a mi señora; y
escriba la carta y despácheme luego, porque tengo gran deseo de volver a
sacar a vuestra merced deste purgatorio donde le dejo.

-¿Purgatorio le llamas, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote-. Mejor hicieras de
llamarle infierno, y aun peor, si hay otra cosa que lo sea.

-Quien ha infierno -respondió Sancho-, nula es retencio, según he oído
decir.

-No entiendo qué quiere decir retencio -dijo don Quijote.

-Retencio es -respondió Sancho- que quien está en el infierno nunca sale
dél, ni puede. Lo cual será al revés en vuestra merced, o a mí me andarán
mal los pies, si es que llevo espuelas para avivar a Rocinante; y póngame
yo una por una en el Toboso, y delante de mi señora Dulcinea, que yo le
diré tales cosas de las necedades y locuras, que todo es uno, que vuestra
merced ha hecho y queda haciendo, que la venga a poner más blanda que un
guante, aunque la halle más dura que un alcornoque; con cuya respuesta
dulce y melificada volveré por los aires, como brujo, y sacaré a vuestra
merced deste purgatorio, que parece infierno y no lo es, pues hay esperanza
de salir dél, la cual, como tengo dicho, no la tienen de salir los que
están en el infierno, ni creo que vuestra merced dirá otra cosa.

-Así es la verdad -dijo el de la Triste Figura-; pero, ¿qué haremos para
escribir la carta?

-Y la libranza pollinesca también -añadió Sancho.

-Todo irá inserto -dijo don Quijote-; y sería bueno, ya que no hay papel,
que la escribiésemos, como hacían los antiguos, en hojas de árboles, o en
unas tablitas de cera; aunque tan dificultoso será hallarse eso ahora como
el papel. Mas ya me ha venido a la memoria dónde será bien, y aun más que
bien, escribilla: que es en el librillo de memoria que fue de Cardenio; y
tú tendrás cuidado de hacerla trasladar en papel, de buena letra, en el
primer lugar que hallares, donde haya maestro de escuela de muchachos, o si
no, cualquiera sacristán te la trasladará; y no se la des a trasladar a
ningún escribano, que hacen letra procesada, que no la entenderá Satanás.
-Pues, ¿qué se ha de hacer de la firma? -dijo Sancho.

-Nunca las cartas de Amadís se firman -respondió don Quijote.

-Está bien -respondió Sancho-, pero la libranza forzosamente se ha de
firmar, y ésa, si se traslada, dirán que la firma es falsa y quedaréme sin
pollinos.

-La libranza irá en el mesmo librillo firmada; que, en viéndola, mi sobrina
no pondrá dificultad en cumplilla. Y, en lo que toca a la carta de amores,
pondrás por firma: "Vuestro hasta la muerte, el Caballero de la Triste
Figura". Y hará poco al caso que vaya de mano ajena, porque, a lo que yo me
sé acordar, Dulcinea no sabe escribir ni leer, y en toda su vida ha visto
letra mía ni carta mía, porque mis amores y los suyos han sido siempre
platónicos, sin estenderse a más que a un honesto mirar. Y aun esto tan de
cuando en cuando, que osaré jurar con verdad que en doce años que ha que la
quiero más que a la lumbre destos ojos que han de comer la tierra, no la he
visto cuatro veces; y aun podrá ser que destas cuatro veces no hubiese ella
echado de ver la una que la miraba: tal es el recato y encerramiento con
que sus padres, Lorenzo Corchuelo, y su madre, Aldonza Nogales, la han
criado.

-¡Ta, ta! -dijo Sancho-. ¿Que la hija de Lorenzo Corchuelo es la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso, llamada por otro nombre Aldonza Lorenzo?

-Ésa es -dijo don Quijote-, y es la que merece ser señora de todo el
universo.

-Bien la conozco -dijo Sancho-, y sé decir que tira tan bien una barra como
el más forzudo zagal de todo el pueblo. ¡Vive el Dador, que es moza de
chapa, hecha y derecha y de pelo en pecho, y que puede sacar la barba del
lodo a cualquier caballero andante, o por andar, que la tuviere por señora!
¡Oh hideputa, qué rejo que tiene, y qué voz! Sé decir que se puso un día
encima del campanario del aldea a llamar unos zagales suyos que andaban en
un barbecho de su padre, y, aunque estaban de allí más de media legua, así
la oyeron como si estuvieran al pie de la torre. Y lo mejor que tiene es
que no es nada melindrosa, porque tiene mucho de cortesana: con todos se
burla y de todo hace mueca y donaire. Ahora digo, señor Caballero de la
Triste Figura, que no solamente puede y debe vuestra merced hacer locuras
por ella, sino que, con justo título, puede desesperarse y ahorcarse; que
nadie habrá que lo sepa que no diga que hizo demasiado de bien, puesto que
le lleve el diablo. Y querría ya verme en camino, sólo por vella; que ha
muchos días que no la veo, y debe de estar ya trocada, porque gasta mucho
la faz de las mujeres andar siempre al campo, al sol y al aire. Y confieso
a vuestra merced una verdad, señor don Quijote: que hasta aquí he estado en
una grande ignorancia; que pensaba bien y fielmente que la señora Dulcinea
debía de ser alguna princesa de quien vuestra merced estaba enamorado, o
alguna persona tal, que mereciese los ricos presentes que vuestra merced le
ha enviado: así el del vizcaíno como el de los galeotes, y otros muchos que
deben ser, según deben de ser muchas las vitorias que vuestra merced ha
ganado y ganó en el tiempo que yo aún no era su escudero. Pero, bien
considerado, ¿qué se le ha de dar a la señora Aldonza Lorenzo, digo, a la
señora Dulcinea del Toboso, de que se le vayan a hincar de rodillas delante
della los vencidos que vuestra merced le envía y ha de enviar? Porque
podría ser que, al tiempo que ellos llegasen, estuviese ella rastrillando
lino, o trillando en las eras, y ellos se corriesen de verla, y ella se
riese y enfadase del presente.

-Ya te tengo dicho antes de agora muchas veces, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-,
que eres muy grande hablador, y que, aunque de ingenio boto, muchas veces
despuntas de agudo. Mas, para que veas cuán necio eres tú y cuán discreto
soy yo, quiero que me oyas un breve cuento. «Has de saber que una viuda
hermosa, moza, libre y rica, y, sobre todo, desenfadada, se enamoró de un
mozo motilón, rollizo y de buen tomo. Alcanzólo a saber su mayor, y un día
dijo a la buena viuda, por vía de fraternal reprehensión: ''Maravillado
estoy, señora, y no sin mucha causa, de que una mujer tan principal, tan
hermosa y tan rica como vuestra merced, se haya enamorado de un hombre tan
soez, tan bajo y tan idiota como fulano, habiendo en esta casa tantos
maestros, tantos presentados y tantos teólogos, en quien vuestra merced
pudiera escoger como entre peras, y decir: "Éste quiero, aquéste no
quiero"''. Mas ella le respondió, con mucho donaire y desenvoltura:
''Vuestra merced, señor mío, está muy engañado, y piensa muy a lo antiguo
si piensa que yo he escogido mal en fulano, por idiota que le parece, pues,
para lo que yo le quiero, tanta filosofía sabe, y más, que Aristóteles''».
Así que, Sancho, por lo que yo quiero a Dulcinea del Toboso, tanto vale
como la más alta princesa de la tierra. Sí, que no todos los poetas que
alaban damas, debajo de un nombre que ellos a su albedrío les ponen, es
verdad que las tienen. ¿Piensas tú que las Amariles, las Filis, las
Silvias, las Dianas, las Galateas, las Alidas y otras tales de que los
libros, los romances, las tiendas de los barberos, los teatros de las
comedias, están llenos, fueron verdaderamente damas de carne y hueso, y de
aquéllos que las celebran y celebraron? No, por cierto, sino que las más se
las fingen, por dar subjeto a sus versos y porque los tengan por enamorados
y por hombres que tienen valor para serlo. Y así, bástame a mí pensar y
creer que la buena de Aldonza Lorenzo es hermosa y honesta; y en lo del
linaje importa poco, que no han de ir a hacer la información dél para darle
algún hábito, y yo me hago cuenta que es la más alta princesa del mundo.
Porque has de saber, Sancho, si no lo sabes, que dos cosas solas incitan a
amar más que otras, que son la mucha hermosura y la buena fama; y estas dos
cosas se hallan consumadamente en Dulcinea, porque en ser hermosa ninguna
le iguala, y en la buena fama, pocas le llegan. Y para concluir con todo,
yo imagino que todo lo que digo es así, sin que sobre ni falte nada; y
píntola en mi imaginación como la deseo, así en la belleza como en la
principalidad, y ni la llega Elena, ni la alcanza Lucrecia, ni otra alguna
de las famosas mujeres de las edades pretéritas, griega, bárbara o latina.
Y diga cada uno lo que quisiere; que si por esto fuere reprehendido de los
ignorantes, no seré castigado de los rigurosos.

-Digo que en todo tiene vuestra merced razón -respondió Sancho-, y que yo
soy un asno. Mas no sé yo para qué nombro asno en mi boca, pues no se ha de
mentar la soga en casa del ahorcado. Pero venga la carta, y a Dios, que me
mudo.

Sacó el libro de memoria don Quijote, y, apartándose a una parte, con mucho
sosiego comenzó a escribir la carta; y, en acabándola, llamó a Sancho y le
dijo que se la quería leer, porque la tomase de memoria, si acaso se le
perdiese por el camino, porque de su desdicha todo se podía temer. A lo
cual respondió Sancho:

-Escríbala vuestra merced dos o tres veces ahí en el libro y démele, que yo
le llevaré bien guardado, porque pensar que yo la he de tomar en la memoria
es disparate: que la tengo tan mala que muchas veces se me olvida cómo me
llamo. Pero, con todo eso, dígamela vuestra merced, que me holgaré mucho de
oílla, que debe de ir como de molde.

-Escucha, que así dice -dijo don Quijote:

Carta de don Quijote a Dulcinea del Toboso

Soberana y alta señora:

El ferido de punta de ausencia y el llagado de las telas del corazón,
dulcísima Dulcinea del Toboso, te envía la salud que él no tiene. Si tu
fermosura me desprecia, si tu valor no es en mi pro, si tus desdenes son en
mi afincamiento, maguer que yo sea asaz de sufrido, mal podré sostenerme en
esta cuita, que, además de ser fuerte, es muy duradera. Mi buen escudero
Sancho te dará entera relación, ¡oh bella ingrata, amada enemiga mía!, del
modo que por tu causa quedo. Si gustares de acorrerme, tuyo soy; y si no,
haz lo que te viniere en gusto; que, con acabar mi vida, habré satisfecho a
tu crueldad y a mi deseo.

Tuyo hasta la muerte,

El Caballero de la Triste Figura.

-Por vida de mi padre -dijo Sancho en oyendo la carta-, que es la más alta
cosa que jamás he oído. ¡Pesia a mí, y cómo que le dice vuestra merced ahí
todo cuanto quiere, y qué bien que encaja en la firma El Caballero de la
Triste Figura! Digo de verdad que es vuestra merced el mesmo diablo, y que
no haya cosa que no sepa.

-Todo es menester -respondió don Quijote- para el oficio que trayo.
-Ea, pues -dijo Sancho-, ponga vuestra merced en esotra vuelta la cédula de
los tres pollinos y fírmela con mucha claridad, porque la conozcan en
viéndola.

-Que me place -dijo don Quijote.

Y, habiéndola escrito,se la leyó; que decía ansí:

Mandará vuestra merced, por esta primera de pollinos, señora sobrina, dar a
Sancho Panza, mi escudero, tres de los cinco que dejé en casa y están a
cargo de vuestra merced. Los cuales tres pollinos se los mando librar y
pagar por otros tantos aquí recebidos de contado, que consta, y con su
carta de pago serán bien dados. Fecha en las entrañas de Sierra Morena, a
veinte y dos de agosto deste presente año.

-Buena está -dijo Sancho-; fírmela vuestra merced.

-No es menester firmarla -dijo don Quijote-, sino solamente poner mi
rúbrica, que es lo mesmo que firma, y para tres asnos, y aun para
trecientos, fuera bastante.

-Yo me confío de vuestra merced -respondió Sancho-. Déjeme, iré a ensillar
a Rocinante, y aparéjese vuestra merced a echarme su bendición, que luego
pienso partirme, sin ver las sandeces que vuestra merced ha de hacer, que
yo diré que le vi hacer tantas que no quiera más.

-Por lo menos quiero, Sancho, y porque es menester ansí, quiero, digo, que
me veas en cueros, y hacer una o dos docenas de locuras, que las haré en
menos de media hora, porque, habiéndolas tú visto por tus ojos, puedas
jurar a tu salvo en las demás que quisieres añadir; y asegúrote que no
dirás tú tantas cuantas yo pienso hacer.

-Por amor de Dios, señor mío, que no vea yo en cueros a vuestra merced, que
me dará mucha lástima y no podré dejar de llorar; y tengo tal la cabeza,
del llanto que anoche hice por el rucio, que no estoy para meterme en
nuevos lloros; y si es que vuestra merced gusta de que yo vea algunas
locuras, hágalas vestido, breves y las que le vinieren más a cuento. Cuanto
más, que para mí no era menester nada deso, y, como ya tengo dicho, fuera
ahorrar el camino de mi vuelta, que ha de ser con las nuevas que vuestra
merced desea y merece. Y si no, aparéjese la señora Dulcinea; que si no
responde como es razón, voto hago solene a quien puedo que le tengo de
sacar la buena respuesta del estómago a coces y a bofetones. Porque, ¿dónde
se ha de sufrir que un caballero andante, tan famoso como vuestra merced,
se vuelva loco, sin qué ni para qué, por una...? No me lo haga decir la
señora, porque por Dios que despotrique y lo eche todo a doce, aunque nunca
se venda. ¡Bonico soy yo para eso! ¡Mal me conoce! ¡Pues, a fe que si me
conociese, que me ayunase!

-A fe, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que, a lo que parece, que no estás tú más
cuerdo que yo.

-No estoy tan loco -respondió Sancho-, mas estoy más colérico. Pero,
dejando esto aparte, ¿qué es lo que ha de comer vuestra merced en tanto que
yo vuelvo? ¿Ha de salir al camino, como Cardenio, a quitárselo a los
pastores?

-No te dé pena ese cuidado -respondió don Quijote-, porque, aunque tuviera,
no comiera otra cosa que las yerbas y frutos que este prado y estos árboles
me dieren, que la fineza de mi negocio está en no comer y en hacer otras
asperezas equivalentes.

-A Dios, pues. Pero, ¿sabe vuestra merced qué temo? Que no tengo de acertar
a volver a este lugar donde agora le dejo, según está de escondido.
-Toma bien las señas, que yo procuraré no apartarme destos contornos -dijo
don Quijote-, y aun tendré cuidado de subirme por estos más altos riscos,
por ver si te descubro cuando vuelvas. Cuanto más, que lo más acertado
será, para que no me yerres y te pierdas, que cortes algunas retamas de las
muchas que por aquí hay y las vayas poniendo de trecho a trecho, hasta
salir a lo raso, las cuales te servirán de mojones y señales para que me
halles cuando vuelvas, a imitación del hilo del laberinto de Teseo.
-Así lo haré -respondió Sancho Panza.

Y, cortando algunos, pidió la bendición a su señor, y, no sin muchas
lágrimas de entrambos, se despidió dél. Y, subiendo sobre Rocinante, a
quien don Quijote encomendó mucho, y que mirase por él como por su propria
persona, se puso en camino del llano, esparciendo de trecho a trecho los
ramos de la retama, como su amo se lo había aconsejado. Y así, se fue,
aunque todavía le importunaba don Quijote que le viese siquiera hacer dos
locuras. Mas no hubo andado cien pasos, cuando volvió y dijo:

-Digo, señor, que vuestra merced ha dicho muy bien: que, para que pueda
jurar sin cargo de conciencia que le he visto hacer locuras, será bien que
vea siquiera una, aunque bien grande la he visto en la quedada de vuestra
merced.

-¿No te lo decía yo? -dijo don Quijote-. Espérate, Sancho, que en un credo
las haré.

Y, desnudándose con toda priesa las calzones, quedó en carnes y en pañales,
y luego, sin más ni más, dio dos zapatetas en el aire y dos tumbas, la
cabeza abajo y los pies en alto, descubriendo cosas que, por no verlas otra
vez, volvió Sancho la rienda a Rocinante y se dio por contento y satisfecho
de que podía jurar que su amo quedaba loco. Y así, le dejaremos ir su
camino, hasta la vuelta, que fue breve.





Capítulo XXVI. Donde se prosiguen las finezas que de enamorado hizo don
Quijote en Sierra Morena


Y, volviendo a contar lo que hizo el de la Triste Figura después que se vio
solo, dice la historia que, así como don Quijote acabó de dar las tumbas o
vueltas, de medio abajo desnudo y de medio arriba vestido, y que vio que
Sancho se había ido sin querer aguardar a ver más sandeces, se subió sobre
una punta de una alta peña y allí tornó a pensar lo que otras muchas veces
había pensado, sin haberse jamás resuelto en ello. Y era que cuál sería
mejor y le estaría más a cuento: imitar a Roldán en las locuras desaforadas
que hizo, o Amadís en las malencónicas. Y, hablando entre sí mesmo, decía:
-Si Roldán fue tan buen caballero y tan valiente como todos dicen, ¿qué
maravilla?, pues, al fin, era encantado y no le podía matar nadie si no era
metiéndole un alfiler de a blanca por la planta del pie, y él traía siempre
los zapatos con siete suelas de hierro. Aunque no le valieron tretas contra
Bernardo del Carpio, que se las entendió y le ahogó entre los brazos, en
Roncesvalles. Pero, dejando en él lo de la valentía a una parte, vengamos a
lo de perder el juicio, que es cierto que le perdió, por las señales que
halló en la fontana y por las nuevas que le dio el pastor de que Angélica
había dormido más de dos siestas con Medoro, un morillo de cabellos
enrizados y paje de Agramante; y si él entendió que esto era verdad y que
su dama le había cometido desaguisado, no hizo mucho en volverse loco. Pero
yo, ¿cómo puedo imitalle en las locuras, si no le imito en la ocasión
dellas? Porque mi Dulcinea del Toboso osaré yo jurar que no ha visto en
todos los días de su vida moro alguno, ansí como él es, en su mismo traje,
y que se está hoy como la madre que la parió; y haríale agravio manifiesto
si, imaginando otra cosa della, me volviese loco de aquel género de locura
de Roldán el furioso. Por otra parte, veo que Amadís de Gaula, sin perder
el juicio y sin hacer locuras, alcanzó tanta fama de enamorado como el que
más; porque lo que hizo, según su historia, no fue más de que, por verse
desdeñado de su señora Oriana, que le había mandado que no pareciese ante
su presencia hasta que fuese su voluntad, de que se retiró a la Peña Pobre
en compañía de un ermitaño, y allí se hartó de llorar y de encomendarse a
Dios, hasta que el cielo le acorrió, en medio de su mayor cuita y
necesidad. Y si esto es verdad, como lo es, ¿para qué quiero yo tomar
trabajo agora de desnudarme del todo, ni dar pesadumbre a estos árboles,
que no me han hecho mal alguno? Ni tengo para qué enturbiar el agua clara
destos arroyos, los cuales me han de dar de beber cuando tenga gana. Viva
la memoria de Amadís, y sea imitado de don Quijote de la Mancha en todo lo
que pudiere; del cual se dirá lo que del otro se dijo: que si no acabó
grandes cosas, murió por acometellas; y si yo no soy desechado ni desdeñado
de Dulcinea del Toboso, bástame, como ya he dicho, estar ausente della. Ea,
pues, manos a la obra: venid a mi memoria, cosas de Amadís, y enseñadme por
dónde tengo de comenzar a imitaros. Mas ya sé que lo más que él hizo fue
rezar y encomendarse a Dios; pero, ¿qué haré de rosario, que no le tengo?
En esto le vino al pensamiento cómo le haría, y fue que rasgó una gran tira
de las faldas de la camisa, que andaban colgando, y diole once ñudos, el
uno más gordo que los demás, y esto le sirvió de rosario el tiempo que allí
estuvo, donde rezó un millón de avemarías. Y lo que le fatigaba mucho era
no hallar por allí otro ermitaño que le confesase y con quien consolarse. Y
así, se entretenía paseándose por el pradecillo, escribiendo y grabando por
las cortezas de los árboles y por la menuda arena muchos versos, todos
acomodados a su tristeza, y algunos en alabanza de Dulcinea. Mas los que se
pudieron hallar enteros y que se pudiesen leer, después que a él allí le
hallaron, no fueron más que estos que aquí se siguen:

  Árboles, yerbas y plantas
  que en aqueste sitio estáis,
  tan altos, verdes y tantas,
  si de mi mal no os holgáis,
  escuchad mis quejas santas.
  Mi dolor no os alborote,
  aunque más terrible sea,
  pues, por pagaros escote,
  aquí lloró don Quijote
  ausencias de Dulcinea
  del Toboso.

  Es aquí el lugar adonde
  el amador más leal
  de su señora se esconde,
  y ha venido a tanto mal
  sin saber cómo o por dónde.
  Tráele amor al estricote,
  que es de muy mala ralea;
  y así, hasta henchir un pipote,
  aquí lloró don Quijote
  ausencias de Dulcinea
  del Toboso.

  Buscando las aventuras
  por entre las duras peñas,
  maldiciendo entrañas duras,
  que entre riscos y entre breñas
  halla el triste desventuras,
  hirióle amor con su azote,
  no con su blanda correa;
  y, en tocándole el cogote,
  aquí lloró don Quijote
  ausencias de Dulcinea
  del Toboso.

No causó poca risa en los que hallaron los versos referidos el añadidura
del Toboso al nombre de Dulcinea, porque imaginaron que debió de imaginar
don Quijote que si, en nombrando a Dulcinea, no decía también del Toboso,
no se podría entender la copla; y así fue la verdad, como él después
confesó. Otros muchos escribió, pero, como se ha dicho, no se pudieron
sacar en limpio, ni enteros, más destas tres coplas. En esto, y en suspirar
y en llamar a los faunos y silvanos de aquellos bosques, a las ninfas de
los ríos, a la dolorosa y húmida Eco, que le respondiese, consolasen y
escuchasen, se entretenía, y en buscar algunas yerbas con que sustentarse
en tanto que Sancho volvía; que, si como tardó tres días, tardara tres
semanas, el Caballero de la Triste Figura quedara tan desfigurado que no le
conociera la madre que lo parió.

Y será bien dejalle, envuelto entre sus suspiros y versos, por contar lo
que le avino a Sancho Panza en su mandadería. Y fue que, en saliendo al
camino real, se puso en busca del Toboso, y otro día llegó a la venta donde
le había sucedido la desgracia de la manta; y no la hubo bien visto, cuando
le pareció que otra vez andaba en los aires, y no quiso entrar dentro,
aunque llegó a hora que lo pudiera y debiera hacer, por ser la del comer y
llevar en deseo de gustar algo caliente; que había grandes días que todo
era fiambre.

Esta necesidad le forzó a que llegase junto a la venta, todavía dudoso si
entraría o no. Y, estando en esto, salieron de la venta dos personas que
luego le conocieron; y dijo el uno al otro:

-Dígame, señor licenciado, aquel del caballo, ¿no es Sancho Panza, el que
dijo el ama de nuestro aventurero que había salido con su señor por
escudero?

-Sí es -dijo el licenciado-; y aquél es el caballo de nuestro don Quijote.
Y conociéronle tan bien como aquellos que eran el cura y el barbero de su
mismo lugar, y los que hicieron el escrutinio y acto general de los libros.
Los cuales, así como acabaron de conocer a Sancho Panza y a Rocinante,
deseosos de saber de don Quijote, se fueron a él; y el cura le llamó por su
nombre, diciéndole:

-Amigo Sancho Panza, ¿adónde queda vuestro amo?

Conociólos luego Sancho Panza, y determinó de encubrir el lugar y la suerte
donde y como su amo quedaba; y así, les respondió que su amo quedaba
ocupado en cierta parte y en cierta cosa que le era de mucha importancia,
la cual él no podía descubrir, por los ojos que en la cara tenía.

-No, no -dijo el barbero-, Sancho Panza; si vos no nos decís dónde queda,
imaginaremos, como ya imaginamos, que vos le habéis muerto y robado, pues
venís encima de su caballo. En verdad que nos habéis de dar el dueño del
rocín, o sobre eso, morena.

-No hay para qué conmigo amenazas, que yo no soy hombre que robo ni mato a
nadie: a cada uno mate su ventura, o Dios, que le hizo. Mi amo queda
haciendo penitencia en la mitad desta montaña, muy a su sabor.

Y luego, de corrida y sin parar, les contó de la suerte que quedaba, las
aventuras que le habían sucedido y cómo llevaba la carta a la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso, que era la hija de Lorenzo Corchuelo, de quien estaba
enamorado hasta los hígados.

Quedaron admirados los dos de lo que Sancho Panza les contaba; y, aunque ya
sabían la locura de don Quijote y el género della, siempre que la oían se
admiraban de nuevo. Pidiéronle a Sancho Panza que les enseñase la carta que
llevaba a la señora Dulcinea del Toboso. Él dijo que iba escrita en un
libro de memoria y que era orden de su señor que la hiciese trasladar en
papel en el primer lugar que llegase; a lo cual dijo el cura que se la
mostrase, que él la trasladaría de muy buena letra. Metió la mano en el
seno Sancho Panza, buscando el librillo, pero no le halló, ni le podía
hallar si le buscara hasta agora, porque se había quedado don Quijote con
él y no se le había dado, ni a él se le acordó de pedírsele.

Cuando Sancho vio que no hallaba el libro, fuésele parando mortal el
rostro; y, tornándose a tentar todo el cuerpo muy apriesa, tornó a echar de
ver que no le hallaba; y, sin más ni más, se echó entrambos puños a las
barbas y se arrancó la mitad de ellas, y luego, apriesa y sin cesar, se dio
media docena de puñadas en el rostro y en las narices, que se las bañó
todas en sangre. Visto lo cual por el cura y el barbero, le dijeron que qué
le había sucedido, que tan mal se paraba.

-¿Qué me ha de suceder -respondió Sancho-, sino el haber perdido de una
mano a otra, en un estante, tres pollinos, que cada uno era como un
castillo?

-¿Cómo es eso? -replicó el barbero.

-He perdido el libro de memoria -respondió Sancho-, donde venía carta para
Dulcinea y una cédula firmada de su señor, por la cual mandaba que su
sobrina me diese tres pollinos, de cuatro o cinco que estaban en casa.
Y, con esto, les contó la pérdida del rucio. Consolóle el cura, y díjole
que, en hallando a su señor, él le haría revalidar la manda y que tornase a
hacer la libranza en papel, como era uso y costumbre, porque las que se
hacían en libros de memoria jamás se acetaban ni cumplían.

Con esto se consoló Sancho, y dijo que, como aquello fuese ansí, que no le
daba mucha pena la pérdida de la carta de Dulcinea, porque él la sabía casi
de memoria, de la cual se podría trasladar donde y cuando quisiesen.
-Decildo, Sancho, pues -dijo el barbero-, que después la trasladaremos.
Paróse Sancho Panza a rascar la cabeza para traer a la memoria la carta, y
ya se ponía sobre un pie, y ya sobre otro; unas veces miraba al suelo,
otras al cielo; y, al cabo de haberse roído la mitad de la yema de un dedo,
teniendo suspensos a los que esperaban que ya la dijese, dijo al cabo de
grandísimo rato:

-Por Dios, señor licenciado, que los diablos lleven la cosa que de la carta
se me acuerda; aunque en el principio decía: «Alta y sobajada señora».
-No diría -dijo el barbero- sobajada, sino sobrehumana o soberana señora.
-Así es -dijo Sancho-. Luego, si mal no me acuerdo, proseguía..., si mal no
me acuerdo: «el llego y falto de sueño, y el ferido besa a vuestra merced
las manos, ingrata y muy desconocida hermosa», y no sé qué decía de salud y
de enfermedad que le enviaba, y por aquí iba escurriendo, hasta que acababa
en «Vuestro hasta la muerte, el Caballero de la Triste Figura».

No poco gustaron los dos de ver la buena memoria de Sancho Panza, y
alabáronsela mucho, y le pidieron que dijese la carta otras dos veces, para
que ellos, ansimesmo, la tomasen de memoria para trasladalla a su tiempo.
Tornóla a decir Sancho otras tres veces, y otras tantas volvió a decir
otros tres mil disparates. Tras esto, contó asimesmo las cosas de su amo,
pero no habló palabra acerca del manteamiento que le había sucedido en
aquella venta, en la cual rehusaba entrar. Dijo también como su señor, en
trayendo que le trujese buen despacho de la señora Dulcinea del Toboso, se
había de poner en camino a procurar cómo ser emperador, o, por lo menos,
monarca; que así lo tenían concertado entre los dos, y era cosa muy fácil
venir a serlo, según era el valor de su persona y la fuerza de su brazo; y
que, en siéndolo, le había de casar a él, porque ya sería viudo, que no
podía ser menos, y le había de dar por mujer a una doncella de la
emperatriz, heredera de un rico y grande estado de tierra firme, sin
ínsulos ni ínsulas, que ya no las quería.

Decía esto Sancho con tanto reposo, limpiándose de cuando en cuando las
narices, y con tan poco juicio, que los dos se admiraron de nuevo,
considerando cuán vehemente había sido la locura de don Quijote, pues había
llevado tras sí el juicio de aquel pobre hombre. No quisieron cansarse en
sacarle del error en que estaba, pareciéndoles que, pues no le dañaba nada
la conciencia, mejor era dejarle en él, y a ellos les sería de más gusto
oír sus necedades. Y así, le dijeron que rogase a Dios por la salud de su
señor, que cosa contingente y muy agible era venir, con el discurso del
tiempo, a ser emperador, como él decía, o, por lo menos, arzobispo, o otra
dignidad equivalente. A lo cual respondió Sancho:

-Señores, si la fortuna rodease las cosas de manera que a mi amo le viniese
en voluntad de no ser emperador, sino de ser arzobispo, querría yo saber
agora qué suelen dar los arzobispos andantes a sus escuderos.
-Suélenles dar -respondió el cura- algún beneficio, simple o curado, o
alguna sacristanía, que les vale mucho de renta rentada, amén del pie de
altar, que se suele estimar en otro tanto.

-Para eso será menester -replicó Sancho- que el escudero no sea casado y
que sepa ayudar a misa, por lo menos; y si esto es así, ¡desdichado de yo,
que soy casado y no sé la primera letra del ABC! ¿Qué será de mí si a mi
amo le da antojo de ser arzobispo, y no emperador, como es uso y costumbre
de los caballeros andantes?

-No tengáis pena, Sancho amigo -dijo el barbero-, que aquí rogaremos a
vuestro amo y se lo aconsejaremos, y aun se lo pondremos en caso de
conciencia, que sea emperador y no arzobispo, porque le será más fácil, a
causa de que él es más valiente que estudiante.

-Así me ha parecido a mí -respondió Sancho-, aunque sé decir que para todo
tiene habilidad. Lo que yo pienso hacer de mi parte es rogarle a Nuestro
Señor que le eche a aquellas partes donde él más se sirva y adonde a mí más
mercedes me haga.

-Vos lo decís como discreto -dijo el cura- y lo haréis como buen cristiano.
Mas lo que ahora se ha de hacer es dar orden como sacar a vuestro amo de
aquella inútil penitencia que decís que queda haciendo; y, para pensar el
modo que hemos de tener, y para comer, que ya es hora, será bien nos
entremos en esta venta.

Sancho dijo que entrasen ellos, que él esperaría allí fuera y que después
les diría la causa por que no entraba ni le convenía entrar en ella; mas
que les rogaba que le sacasen allí algo de comer que fuese cosa caliente,
y, ansimismo, cebada para Rocinante. Ellos se entraron y le dejaron, y, de
allí a poco, el barbero le sacó de comer. Después, habiendo bien pensado
entre los dos el modo que tendrían para conseguir lo que deseaban, vino el
cura en un pensamiento muy acomodado al gusto de don Quijote y para lo que
ellos querían. Y fue que dijo al barbero que lo que había pensado era que
él se vestiría en hábito de doncella andante, y que él procurase ponerse lo
mejor que pudiese como escudero, y que así irían adonde don Quijote estaba,
fingiendo ser ella una doncella afligida y menesterosa, y le pediría un
don, el cual él no podría dejársele de otorgar, como valeroso caballero
andante. Y que el don que le pensaba pedir era que se viniese con ella
donde ella le llevase, a desfacelle un agravio que un mal caballero le
tenía fecho; y que le suplicaba, ansimesmo, que no la mandase quitar su
antifaz, ni la demandase cosa de su facienda, fasta que la hubiese fecho
derecho de aquel mal caballero; y que creyese, sin duda, que don Quijote
vendría en todo cuanto le pidiese por este término; y que desta manera le
sacarían de allí y le llevarían a su lugar, donde procurarían ver si tenía
algún remedio su estraña locura.





Capítulo XXVII. De cómo salieron con su intención el cura y el barbero, con
otras cosas dignas de que se cuenten en esta grande historia


No le pareció mal al barbero la invención del cura, sino tan bien, que
luego la pusieron por obra. Pidiéronle a la ventera una saya y unas tocas,
dejándole en prendas una sotana nueva del cura. El barbero hizo una gran
barba de una cola rucia o roja de buey, donde el ventero tenía colgado el
peine. Preguntóles la ventera que para qué le pedían aquellas cosas. El
cura le contó en breves razones la locura de don Quijote, y cómo convenía
aquel disfraz para sacarle de la montaña, donde a la sazón estaba. Cayeron
luego el ventero y la ventera en que el loco era su huésped, el del
bálsamo, y el amo del manteado escudero, y contaron al cura todo lo que con
él les había pasado, sin callar lo que tanto callaba Sancho. En resolución,
la ventera vistió al cura de modo que no había más que ver: púsole una saya
de paño, llena de fajas de terciopelo negro de un palmo en ancho, todas
acuchilladas, y unos corpiños de terciopelo verde, guarnecidos con unos
ribetes de raso blanco, que se debieron de hacer, ellos y la saya, en
tiempo del rey Wamba. No consintió el cura que le tocasen, sino púsose en
la cabeza un birretillo de lienzo colchado que llevaba para dormir de
noche, y ciñóse por la frente una liga de tafetán negro, y con otra liga
hizo un antifaz, con que se cubrió muy bien las barbas y el rostro;
encasquetóse su sombrero, que era tan grande que le podía servir de
quitasol, y, cubriéndose su herreruelo, subió en su mula a mujeriegas, y el
barbero en la suya, con su barba que le llegaba a la cintura, entre roja y
blanca, como aquella que, como se ha dicho, era hecha de la cola de un buey
barroso.

Despidiéronse de todos, y de la buena de Maritornes, que prometió de rezar
un rosario, aunque pecadora, porque Dios les diese buen suceso en tan arduo
y tan cristiano negocio como era el que habían emprendido.

Mas, apenas hubo salido de la venta, cuando le vino al cura un pensamiento:
que hacía mal en haberse puesto de aquella manera, por ser cosa indecente
que un sacerdote se pusiese así, aunque le fuese mucho en ello; y,
diciéndoselo al barbero, le rogó que trocasen trajes, pues era más justo
que él fuese la doncella menesterosa, y que él haría el escudero, y que así
se profanaba menos su dignidad; y que si no lo quería hacer, determinaba de
no pasar adelante, aunque a don Quijote se le llevase el diablo.

En esto, llegó Sancho, y de ver a los dos en aquel traje no pudo tener la
risa. En efeto, el barbero vino en todo aquello que el cura quiso, y,
trocando la invención, el cura le fue informando el modo que había de tener
y las palabras que había de decir a don Quijote para moverle y forzarle a
que con él se viniese, y dejase la querencia del lugar que había escogido
para su vana penitencia. El barbero respondió que, sin que se le diese
lición, él lo pondría bien en su punto. No quiso vestirse por entonces,
hasta que estuviesen junto de donde don Quijote estaba; y así, dobló sus
vestidos, y el cura acomodó su barba, y siguieron su camino, guiándolos
Sancho Panza; el cual les fue contando lo que les aconteció con el loco que
hallaron en la sierra, encubriendo, empero, el hallazgo de la maleta y de
cuanto en ella venía; que, maguer que tonto, era un poco codicioso el
mancebo.

Otro día llegaron al lugar donde Sancho había dejado puestas las señales de
las ramas para acertar el lugar donde había dejado a su señor; y, en
reconociéndole, les dijo como aquélla era la entrada, y que bien se podían
vestir, si era que aquello hacía al caso para la libertad de su señor;
porque ellos le habían dicho antes que el ir de aquella suerte y vestirse
de aquel modo era toda la importancia para sacar a su amo de aquella mala
vida que había escogido, y que le encargaban mucho que no dijese a su amo
quien ellos eran, ni que los conocía; y que si le preguntase, como se lo
había de preguntar, si dio la carta a Dulcinea, dijese que sí, y que, por
no saber leer, le había respondido de palabra, diciéndole que le mandaba,
so pena de la su desgracia, que luego al momento se viniese a ver con ella,
que era cosa que le importaba mucho; porque con esto y con lo que ellos
pensaban decirle tenían por cosa cierta reducirle a mejor vida, y hacer con
él que luego se pusiese en camino para ir a ser emperador o monarca; que en
lo de ser arzobispo no había de qué temer.

Todo lo escuchó Sancho, y lo tomó muy bien en la memoria, y les agradeció
mucho la intención que tenían de aconsejar a su señor fuese emperador y no
arzobispo, porque él tenía para sí que, para hacer mercedes a sus
escuderos, más podían los emperadores que los arzobispos andantes. También
les dijo que sería bien que él fuese delante a buscarle y darle la
respuesta de su señora, que ya sería ella bastante a sacarle de aquel
lugar, sin que ellos se pusiesen en tanto trabajo. Parecióles bien lo que
Sancho Panza decía, y así, determinaron de aguardarle hasta que volviese
con las nuevas del hallazgo de su amo.

Entróse Sancho por aquellas quebradas de la sierra, dejando a los dos en
una por donde corría un pequeño y manso arroyo, a quien hacían sombra
agradable y fresca otras peñas y algunos árboles que por allí estaban. El
calor, y el día que allí llegaron, era de los del mes de agosto, que por
aquellas partes suele ser el ardor muy grande; la hora, las tres de la
tarde: todo lo cual hacía al sitio más agradable, y que convidase a que en
él esperasen la vuelta de Sancho, como lo hicieron.

Estando, pues, los dos allí, sosegados y a la sombra, llegó a sus oídos una
voz que, sin acompañarla son de algún otro instrumento, dulce y
regaladamente sonaba, de que no poco se admiraron, por parecerles que aquél
no era lugar donde pudiese haber quien tan bien cantase. Porque, aunque
suele decirse que por las selvas y campos se hallan pastores de voces
estremadas, más son encarecimientos de poetas que verdades; y más, cuando
advirtieron que lo que oían cantar eran versos, no de rústicos ganaderos,
sino de discretos cortesanos. Y confirmó esta verdad haber sido los versos
que oyeron éstos:

   ¿Quién menoscaba mis bienes?
   Desdenes.
   Y ¿quién aumenta mis duelos?
   Los celos.
   Y ¿quién prueba mi paciencia?
   Ausencia.
   De ese modo, en mi dolencia
   ningún remedio se alcanza,
   pues me matan la esperanza
   desdenes, celos y ausencia.
   ¿Quién me causa este dolor?
   Amor.
   Y ¿quién mi gloria repugna?
   Fortuna.
   Y ¿quién consiente en mi duelo?
   El cielo
   De ese modo, yo recelo
   morir deste mal estraño,
   pues se aumentan en mi daño,
   amor, fortuna y el cielo.
   ¿Quién mejorará mi suerte?
   La muerte.
   Y el bien de amor, ¿quién le alcanza?
   Mudanza.
   Y sus males, ¿quién los cura?
   Locura.
   De ese modo, no es cordura
   querer curar la pasión
   cuando los remedios son
   muerte, mudanza y locura.

La hora, el tiempo, la soledad, la voz y la destreza del que cantaba causó
admiración y contento en los dos oyentes, los cuales se estuvieron quedos,
esperando si otra alguna cosa oían; pero, viendo que duraba algún tanto el
silencio, determinaron de salir a buscar el músico que con tan buena voz
cantaba. Y, queriéndolo poner en efeto, hizo la mesma voz que no se
moviesen, la cual llegó de nuevo a sus oídos, cantando este soneto:

Soneto

   Santa amistad, que con ligeras alas,
   tu apariencia quedándose en el suelo,
   entre benditas almas, en el cielo,
   subiste alegre a las impíreas salas,
   desde allá, cuando quieres, nos señalas
   la justa paz cubierta con un velo,
   por quien a veces se trasluce el celo
   de buenas obras que, a la fin, son malas.
   Deja el cielo, ¡oh amistad!, o no permitas
   que el engaño se vista tu librea,
   con que destruye a la intención sincera;
   que si tus apariencias no le quitas,
   presto ha de verse el mundo en la pelea
   de la discorde confusión primera.

El canto se acabó con un profundo suspiro, y los dos, con atención,
volvieron a esperar si más se cantaba; pero, viendo que la música se había
vuelto en sollozos y en lastimeros ayes, acordaron de saber quién era el
triste, tan estremado en la voz como doloroso en los gemidos; y no
anduvieron mucho, cuando, al volver de una punta de una peña, vieron a un
hombre del mismo talle y figura que Sancho Panza les había pintado cuando
les contó el cuento de Cardenio; el cual hombre, cuando los vio, sin
sobresaltarse, estuvo quedo, con la cabeza inclinada sobre el pecho a guisa
de hombre pensativo, sin alzar los ojos a mirarlos más de la vez primera,
cuando de improviso llegaron.

El cura, que era hombre bien hablado (como el que ya tenía noticia de su
desgracia, pues por las señas le había conocido), se llegó a él, y con
breves aunque muy discretas razones le rogó y persuadió que aquella tan
miserable vida dejase, porque allí no la perdiese, que era la desdicha
mayor de las desdichas. Estaba Cardenio entonces en su entero juicio, libre
de aquel furioso accidente que tan a menudo le sacaba de sí mismo; y así,
viendo a los dos en traje tan no usado de los que por aquellas soledades
andaban, no dejó de admirarse algún tanto, y más cuando oyó que le habían
hablado en su negocio como en cosa sabida -porque las razones que el cura
le dijo así lo dieron a entender-; y así, respondió desta manera:
-Bien veo yo, señores, quienquiera que seáis, que el cielo, que tiene
cuidado de socorrer a los buenos, y aun a los malos muchas veces, sin yo
merecerlo, me envía, en estos tan remotos y apartados lugares del trato
común de las gentes, algunas personas que, poniéndome delante de los ojos
con vivas y varias razones cuán sin ella ando en hacer la vida que hago,
han procurado sacarme désta a mejor parte; pero, como no saben que sé yo
que en saliendo deste daño he de caer en otro mayor, quizá me deben de
tener por hombre de flacos discursos, y aun, lo que peor sería, por de
ningún juicio. Y no sería maravilla que así fuese, porque a mí se me
trasluce que la fuerza de la imaginación de mis desgracias es tan intensa y
puede tanto en mi perdición que, sin que yo pueda ser parte a estobarlo,
vengo a quedar como piedra, falto de todo buen sentido y conocimiento; y
vengo a caer en la cuenta desta verdad, cuando algunos me dicen y muestran
señales de las cosas que he hecho en tanto que aquel terrible accidente me
señorea, y no sé más que dolerme en vano y maldecir sin provecho mi
ventura, y dar por disculpa de mis locuras el decir la causa dellas a
cuantos oírla quieren; porque, viendo los cuerdos cuál es la causa, no se
maravillarán de los efetos, y si no me dieren remedio, a lo menos no me
darán culpa, convirtiéndoseles el enojo de mi desenvoltura en lástima de
mis desgracias. Y si es que vosotros, señores, venís con la mesma intención
que otros han venido, antes que paséis adelante en vuestras discretas
persuasiones, os ruego que escuchéis el cuento, que no le tiene, de mis
desventuras; porque quizá, después de entendido, ahorraréis del trabajo que
tomaréis en consolar un mal que de todo consuelo es incapaz.

Los dos, que no deseaban otra cosa que saber de su mesma boca la causa de
su daño, le rogaron se la contase, ofreciéndole de no hacer otra cosa de la
que él quisiese, en su remedio o consuelo; y con esto, el triste caballero
comenzó su lastimera historia, casi por las mesmas palabras y pasos que la
había contado a don Quijote y al cabrero pocos días atrás, cuando, por
ocasión del maestro Elisabat y puntualidad de don Quijote en guardar el
decoro a la caballería, se quedó el cuento imperfeto, como la historia lo
deja contado. Pero ahora quiso la buena suerte que se detuvo el accidente
de la locura y le dio lugar de contarlo hasta el fin; y así, llegando al
paso del billete que había hallado don Fernando entre el libro de Amadís de
Gaula, dijo Cardenio que le tenía bien en la memoria, y que decía desta
manera:

«Luscinda a Cardenio

Cada día descubro en vos valores que me obligan y fuerzan a que en más os
estime; y así, si quisiéredes sacarme desta deuda sin ejecutarme en la
honra, lo podréis muy bien hacer. Padre tengo, que os conoce y que me
quiere bien, el cual, sin forzar mi voluntad, cumplirá la que será justo
que vos tengáis, si es que me estimáis como decís y como yo creo.
-»Por este billete me moví a pedir a Luscinda por esposa, como ya os he
contado, y éste fue por quien quedó Luscinda en la opinión de don Fernando
por una de las más discretas y avisadas mujeres de su tiempo; y este
billete fue el que le puso en deseo de destruirme, antes que el mío se
efetuase. Díjele yo a don Fernando en lo que reparaba el padre de Luscinda,
que era en que mi padre se la pidiese, lo cual yo no le osaba decir,
temeroso que no vendría en ello, no porque no tuviese bien conocida la
calidad, bondad, virtud y hermosura de Luscinda, y que tenía partes
bastantes para enoblecer cualquier otro linaje de España, sino porque yo
entendía dél que deseaba que no me casase tan presto, hasta ver lo que el
duque Ricardo hacía conmigo. En resolución, le dije que no me aventuraba a
decírselo a mi padre, así por aquel inconveniente como por otros muchos que
me acobardaban, sin saber cuáles eran, sino que me parecía que lo que yo
desease jamás había de tener efeto.

»A todo esto me respondió don Fernando que él se encargaba de hablar a mi
padre y hacer con él que hablase al de Luscinda. ¡Oh Mario ambicioso, oh
Catilina cruel, oh Sila facinoroso, oh Galalón embustero, oh Vellido
traidor, oh Julián vengativo, oh Judas codicioso! Traidor, cruel, vengativo
y embustero, ¿qué deservicios te había hecho este triste, que con tanta
llaneza te descubrió los secretos y contentos de su corazón? ¿Qué ofensa te
hice? ¿Qué palabras te dije, o qué consejos te di, que no fuesen todos
encaminados a acrecentar tu honra y tu provecho? Mas, ¿de qué me quejo?,
¡desventurado de mí!, pues es cosa cierta que cuando traen las desgracias
la corriente de las estrellas, como vienen de alto a bajo, despeñándose con
furor y con violencia, no hay fuerza en la tierra que las detenga, ni
industria humana que prevenirlas pueda. ¿Quién pudiera imaginar que don
Fernando, caballero ilustre, discreto, obligado de mis servicios, poderoso
para alcanzar lo que el deseo amoroso le pidiese dondequiera que le
ocupase, se había de enconar, como suele decirse, en tomarme a mí una sola
oveja, que aún no poseía? Pero quédense estas consideraciones aparte, como
inútiles y sin provecho, y añudemos el roto hilo de mi desdichada historia.

»Digo, pues, que, pareciéndole a don Fernando que mi presencia le era
inconveniente para poner en ejecución su falso y mal pensamiento, determinó
de enviarme a su hermano mayor, con ocasión de pedirle unos dineros para
pagar seis caballos, que de industria, y sólo para este efeto de que me
ausentase (para poder mejor salir con su dañado intento), el mesmo día que
se ofreció hablar a mi padre los compró, y quiso que yo viniese por el
dinero. ¿Pude yo prevenir esta traición? ¿Pude, por ventura, caer en
imaginarla? No, por cierto; antes, con grandísimo gusto, me ofrecí a partir
luego, contento de la buena compra hecha. Aquella noche hablé con Luscinda,
y le dije lo que con don Fernando quedaba concertado, y que tuviese firme
esperanza de que tendrían efeto nuestros buenos y justos deseos. Ella me
dijo, tan segura como yo de la traición de don Fernando, que procurase
volver presto, porque creía que no tardaría más la conclusión de nuestras
voluntades que tardase mi padre de hablar al suyo. No sé qué se fue, que,
en acabando de decirme esto, se le llenaron los ojos de lágrimas y un nudo
se le atravesó en la garganta, que no le dejaba hablar palabra de otras
muchas que me pareció que procuraba decirme.

»Quedé admirado deste nuevo accidente, hasta allí jamás en ella visto,
porque siempre nos hablábamos, las veces que la buena fortuna y mi
diligencia lo concedía, con todo regocijo y contento, sin mezclar en
nuestras pláticas lágrimas, suspiros, celos, sospechas o temores. Todo era
engrandecer yo mi ventura, por habérmela dado el cielo por señora:
exageraba su belleza, admirábame de su valor y entendimiento. Volvíame ella
el recambio, alabando en mí lo que, como enamorada, le parecía digno de
alabanza. Con esto, nos contábamos cien mil niñerías y acaecimientos de
nuestros vecinos y conocidos, y a lo que más se entendía mi desenvoltura
era a tomarle, casi por fuerza, una de sus bellas y blancas manos, y
llegarla a mi boca, según daba lugar la estrecheza de una baja reja que nos
dividía. Pero la noche que precedió al triste día de mi partida, ella
lloró, gimió y suspiró, y se fue, y me dejó lleno de confusión y
sobresalto, espantado de haber visto tan nuevas y tan tristes muestras de
dolor y sentimiento en Luscinda. Pero, por no destruir mis esperanzas, todo
lo atribuí a la fuerza del amor que me tenía y al dolor que suele causar la
ausencia en los que bien se quieren.

»En fin, yo me partí triste y pensativo, llena el alma de imaginaciones y
sospechas, sin saber lo que sospechaba ni imaginaba: claros indicios que me
mostraban el triste suceso y desventura que me estaba guardada. Llegué al
lugar donde era enviado. Di las cartas al hermano de don Fernando. Fui bien
recebido, pero no bien despachado, porque me mandó aguardar, bien a mi
disgusto, ocho días, y en parte donde el duque, su padre, no me viese,
porque su hermano le escribía que le enviase cierto dinero sin su
sabiduría. Y todo fue invención del falso don Fernando, pues no le faltaban
a su hermano dineros para despacharme luego. Orden y mandato fue éste que
me puso en condición de no obedecerle, por parecerme imposible sustentar
tantos días la vida en el ausencia de Luscinda, y más, habiéndola dejado
con la tristeza que os he contado; pero, con todo esto, obedecí, como buen
criado, aunque veía que había de ser a costa de mi salud.

»Pero, a los cuatro días que allí llegué, llegó un hombre en mi busca con
una carta, que me dio, que en el sobrescrito conocí ser de Luscinda, porque
la letra dél era suya. Abríla, temeroso y con sobresalto, creyendo que cosa
grande debía de ser la que la había movido a escribirme estando ausente,
pues presente pocas veces lo hacía. Preguntéle al hombre, antes de leerla,
quién se la había dado y el tiempo que había tardado en el camino. Díjome
que acaso, pasando por una calle de la ciudad a la hora de medio día, una
señora muy hermosa le llamó desde una ventana, los ojos llenos de lágrimas,
y que con mucha priesa le dijo: ''Hermano: si sois cristiano, como
parecéis, por amor de Dios os ruego que encaminéis luego luego esta carta
al lugar y a la persona que dice el sobrescrito, que todo es bien conocido,
y en ello haréis un gran servicio a nuestro Señor; y, para que no os falte
comodidad de poderlo hacer, tomad lo que va en este pañuelo''. ''Y,
diciendo esto, me arrojó por la ventana un pañuelo, donde venían atados
cien reales y esta sortija de oro que aquí traigo, con esa carta que os he
dado. Y luego, sin aguardar respuesta mía, se quitó de la ventana; aunque
primero vio cómo yo tomé la carta y el pañuelo, y, por señas, le dije que
haría lo que me mandaba. Y así, viéndome tan bien pagado del trabajo que
podía tomar en traérosla y conociendo por el sobrescrito que érades vos a
quien se enviaba, porque yo, señor, os conozco muy bien, y obligado
asimesmo de las lágrimas de aquella hermosa señora, determiné de no fiarme
de otra persona, sino venir yo mesmo a dárosla; y en diez y seis horas que
ha que se me dio, he hecho el camino, que sabéis que es de diez y ocho
leguas''.

»En tanto que el agradecido y nuevo correo esto me decía, estaba yo colgado
de sus palabras, temblándome las piernas de manera que apenas podía
sostenerme. En efeto, abrí la carta y vi que contenía estas razones:
La palabra que don Fernando os dio de hablar a vuestro padre para que
hablase al mío, la ha cumplido más en su gusto que en vuestro provecho.
Sabed, señor, que él me ha pedido por esposa, y mi padre, llevado de la
ventaja que él piensa que don Fernando os hace, ha venido en lo que quiere,
con tantas veras que de aquí a dos días se ha de hacer el desposorio, tan
secreto y tan a solas, que sólo han de ser testigos los cielos y alguna
gente de casa. Cual yo quedo, imaginaldo; si os cumple venir, veldo; y si
os quiero bien o no, el suceso deste negocio os lo dará a entender. A Dios
plega que ésta llegue a vuestras manos antes que la mía se vea en condición
de juntarse con la de quien tan mal sabe guardar la fe que promete.
»Éstas, en suma, fueron las razones que la carta contenía y las que me
hicieron poner luego en camino, sin esperar otra respuesta ni otros
dineros; que bien claro conocí entonces que no la compra de los caballos,
sino la de su gusto, había movido a don Fernando a enviarme a su hermano.
El enojo que contra don Fernando concebí, junto con el temor de perder la
prenda que con tantos años de servicios y deseos tenía granjeada, me
pusieron alas, pues, casi como en vuelo, otro día me puse en mi lugar, al
punto y hora que convenía para ir a hablar a Luscinda. Entré secreto, y
dejé una mula en que venía en casa del buen hombre que me había llevado la
carta; y quiso la suerte que entonces la tuviese tan buena que hallé a
Luscinda puesta a la reja, testigo de nuestros amores. Conocióme Luscinda
luego, y conocíla yo; mas no como debía ella conocerme y yo conocerla.
Pero, ¿quién hay en el mundo que se pueda alabar que ha penetrado y sabido
el confuso pensamiento y condición mudable de una mujer? Ninguno, por
cierto.

»Digo, pues, que, así como Luscinda me vio, me dijo: ''Cardenio, de boda
estoy vestida; ya me están aguardando en la sala don Fernando el traidor y
mi padre el codicioso, con otros testigos, que antes lo serán de mi muerte
que de mi desposorio. No te turbes, amigo, sino procura hallarte presente a
este sacrificio, el cual si no pudiere ser estorbado de mis razones, una
daga llevo escondida que podrá estorbar más determinadas fuerzas, dando fin
a mi vida y principio a que conozcas la voluntad que te he tenido y
tengo''. Yo le respondí turbado y apriesa, temeroso no me faltase lugar
para responderla: ''Hagan, señora, tus obras verdaderas tus palabras; que
si tú llevas daga para acreditarte, aquí llevo yo espada para defenderte
con ella o para matarme si la suerte nos fuere contraria''. No creo que
pudo oír todas estas razones, porque sentí que la llamaban apriesa, porque
el desposado aguardaba. Cerróse con esto la noche de mi tristeza, púsoseme
el sol de mi alegría: quedé sin luz en los ojos y sin discurso en el
entendimiento. No acertaba a entrar en su casa, ni podía moverme a parte
alguna; pero, considerando cuánto importaba mi presencia para lo que
suceder pudiese en aquel caso, me animé lo más que pude y entré en su casa.
Y, como ya sabía muy bien todas sus entradas y salidas, y más con el
alboroto que de secreto en ella andaba, nadie me echó de ver. Así que, sin
ser visto, tuve lugar de ponerme en el hueco que hacía una ventana de la
mesma sala, que con las puntas y remates de dos tapices se cubría, por
entre las cuales podía yo ver, sin ser visto, todo cuanto en la sala se
hacía.

»¿Quién pudiera decir ahora los sobresaltos que me dio el corazón mientras
allí estuve, los pensamientos que me ocurrieron, las consideraciones que
hice?, que fueron tantas y tales, que ni se pueden decir ni aun es bien que
se digan. Basta que sepáis que el desposado entró en la sala sin otro
adorno que los mesmos vestidos ordinarios que solía. Traía por padrino a un
primo hermano de Luscinda, y en toda la sala no había persona de fuera,
sino los criados de casa. De allí a un poco, salió de una recámara
Luscinda, acompañada de su madre y de dos doncellas suyas, tan bien
aderezada y compuesta como su calidad y hermosura merecían, y como quien
era la perfeción de la gala y bizarría cortesana. No me dio lugar mi
suspensión y arrobamiento para que mirase y notase en particular lo que
traía vestido; sólo pude advertir a las colores, que eran encarnado y
blanco, y en las vislumbres que las piedras y joyas del tocado y de todo el
vestido hacían, a todo lo cual se aventajaba la belleza singular de sus
hermosos y rubios cabellos; tales que, en competencia de las preciosas
piedras y de las luces de cuatro hachas que en la sala estaban, la suya con
más resplandor a los ojos ofrecían. ¡Oh memoria, enemiga mortal de mi
descanso! ¿De qué sirve representarme ahora la incomparable belleza de
aquella adorada enemiga mía? ¿No será mejor, cruel memoria, que me acuerdes
y representes lo que entonces hizo, para que, movido de tan manifiesto
agravio, procure, ya que no la venganza, a lo menos perder la vida?» No os
canséis, señores, de oír estas digresiones que hago; que no es mi pena de
aquellas que puedan ni deban contarse sucintamente y de paso, pues cada
circunstancia suya me parece a mí que es digna de un largo discurso.

A esto le respondió el cura que no sólo no se cansaban en oírle, sino que
les daba mucho gusto las menudencias que contaba, por ser tales, que
merecían no pasarse en silencio, y la mesma atención que lo principal del
cuento.

-«Digo, pues -prosiguió Cardenio-, que, estando todos en la sala, entró el
cura de la perroquia, y, tomando a los dos por la mano para hacer lo que en
tal acto se requiere, al decir: ''¿Queréis, señora Luscinda, al señor don
Fernando, que está presente, por vuestro legítimo esposo, como lo manda la
Santa Madre Iglesia?'', yo saqué toda la cabeza y cuello de entre los
tapices, y con atentísimos oídos y alma turbada me puse a escuchar lo que
Luscinda respondía, esperando de su respuesta la sentencia de mi muerte o
la confirmación de mi vida. ¡Oh, quién se atreviera a salir entonces,
diciendo a voces!: ''¡Ah Luscinda, Luscinda, mira lo que haces, considera
lo que me debes, mira que eres mía y que no puedes ser de otro! Advierte
que el decir tú sí y el acabárseme la vida ha de ser todo a un punto. ¡Ah
traidor don Fernando, robador de mi gloria, muerte de mi vida! ¿Qué
quieres? ¿Qué pretendes? Considera que no puedes cristianamente llegar al
fin de tus deseos, porque Luscinda es mi esposa y yo soy su marido''. ¡Ah,
loco de mí, ahora que estoy ausente y lejos del peligro, digo que había de
hacer lo que no hice! ¡Ahora que dejé robar mi cara prenda, maldigo al
robador, de quien pudiera vengarme si tuviera corazón para ello como le
tengo para quejarme! En fin, pues fui entonces cobarde y necio, no es mucho
que muera ahora corrido, arrepentido y loco.

»Estaba esperando el cura la respuesta de Luscinda, que se detuvo un buen
espacio en darla, y, cuando yo pensé que sacaba la daga para acreditarse, o
desataba la lengua para decir alguna verdad o desengaño que en mi provecho
redundase, oigo que dijo con voz desmayada y flaca: ''Sí quiero''; y lo
mesmo dijo don Fernando; y, dándole el anillo, quedaron en disoluble nudo
ligados. Llegó el desposado a abrazar a su esposa, y ella, poniéndose la
mano sobre el corazón, cayó desmayada en los brazos de su madre. Resta
ahora decir cuál quedé yo viendo, en el sí que había oído, burladas mis
esperanzas, falsas las palabras y promesas de Luscinda: imposibilitado de
cobrar en algún tiempo el bien que en aquel instante había perdido. Quedé
falto de consejo, desamparado, a mi parecer, de todo el cielo, hecho
enemigo de la tierra que me sustentaba, negándome el aire aliento para mis
suspiros y el agua humor para mis ojos; sólo el fuego se acrecentó de
manera que todo ardía de rabia y de celos.

»Alborotáronse todos con el desmayo de Luscinda, y, desabrochándole su
madre el pecho para que le diese el aire, se descubrió en él un papel
cerrado, que don Fernando tomó luego y se le puso a leer a la luz de una de
las hachas; y, en acabando de leerle, se sentó en una silla y se puso la
mano en la mejilla, con muestras de hombre muy pensativo, sin acudir a los
remedios que a su esposa se hacían para que del desmayo volviese. Yo,
viendo alborotada toda la gente de casa, me aventuré a salir, ora fuese
visto o no, con determinación que si me viesen, de hacer un desatino tal,
que todo el mundo viniera a entender la justa indignación de mi pecho en el
castigo del falso don Fernando, y aun en el mudable de la desmayada
traidora. Pero mi suerte, que para mayores males, si es posible que los
haya, me debe tener guardado, ordenó que en aquel punto me sobrase el
entendimiento que después acá me ha faltado; y así, sin querer tomar
venganza de mis mayores enemigos (que, por estar tan sin pensamiento mío,
fuera fácil tomarla), quise tomarla de mi mano y ejecutar en mí la pena que
ellos merecían; y aun quizá con más rigor del que con ellos se usara si
entonces les diera muerte, pues la que se recibe repentina presto acaba la
pena; mas la que se dilata con tormentos siempre mata, sin acabar la vida.
»En fin, yo salí de aquella casa y vine a la de aquél donde había dejado la
mula; hice que me la ensillase, sin despedirme dél subí en ella, y salí de
la ciudad, sin osar, como otro Lot, volver el rostro a miralla; y cuando me
vi en el campo solo, y que la escuridad de la noche me encubría y su
silencio convidaba a quejarme, sin respeto o miedo de ser escuchado ni
conocido, solté la voz y desaté la lengua en tantas maldiciones de Luscinda
y de don Fernando, como si con ellas satisficiera el agravio que me habían
hecho. Dile títulos de cruel, de ingrata, de falsa y desagradecida; pero,
sobre todos, de codiciosa, pues la riqueza de mi enemigo la había cerrado
los ojos de la voluntad, para quitármela a mí y entregarla a aquél con
quien más liberal y franca la fortuna se había mostrado; y, en mitad de la
fuga destas maldiciones y vituperios, la desculpaba, diciendo que no era
mucho que una doncella recogida en casa de sus padres, hecha y acostumbrada
siempre a obedecerlos, hubiese querido condecender con su gusto, pues le
daban por esposo a un caballero tan principal, tan rico y tan gentil hombre
que, a no querer recebirle, se podía pensar, o que no tenía juicio, o que
en otra parte tenía la voluntad: cosa que redundaba tan en perjuicio de su
buena opinión y fama. Luego volvía diciendo que, puesto que ella dijera que
yo era su esposo, vieran ellos que no había hecho en escogerme tan mala
elección, que no la disculparan, pues antes de ofrecérseles don Fernando no
pudieran ellos mesmos acertar a desear, si con razón midiesen su deseo,
otro mejor que yo para esposo de su hija; y que bien pudiera ella, antes de
ponerse en el trance forzoso y último de dar la mano, decir que ya yo le
había dado la mía; que yo viniera y concediera con todo cuanto ella
acertara a fingir en este caso.

»En fin, me resolví en que poco amor, poco juicio, mucha ambición y deseos
de grandezas hicieron que se olvidase de las palabras con que me había
engañado, entretenido y sustentado en mis firmes esperanzas y honestos
deseos. Con estas voces y con esta inquietud caminé lo que quedaba de
aquella noche, y di al amanecer en una entrada destas sierras, por las
cuales caminé otros tres días, sin senda ni camino alguno, hasta que vine a
parar a unos prados, que no sé a qué mano destas montañas caen, y allí
pregunté a unos ganaderos que hacia dónde era lo más áspero destas sierras.
Dijéronme que hacia esta parte. Luego me encaminé a ella, con intención de
acabar aquí la vida, y, en entrando por estas asperezas, del cansancio y de
la hambre se cayó mi mula muerta, o, lo que yo más creo, por desechar de sí
tan inútil carga como en mí llevaba. Yo quedé a pie, rendido de la
naturaleza, traspasado de hambre, sin tener, ni pensar buscar, quien me
socorriese.

»De aquella manera estuve no sé qué tiempo, tendido en el suelo, al cabo
del cual me levanté sin hambre, y hallé junto a mí a unos cabreros, que,
sin duda, debieron ser los que mi necesidad remediaron, porque ellos me
dijeron de la manera que me habían hallado, y cómo estaba diciendo tantos
disparates y desatinos, que daba indicios claros de haber perdido el
juicio; y yo he sentido en mí, después acá, que no todas veces le tengo
cabal, sino tan desmedrado y flaco que hago mil locuras, rasgándome los
vestidos, dando voces por estas soledades, maldiciendo mi ventura y
repitiendo en vano el nombre amado de mi enemiga, sin tener otro discurso
ni intento entonces que procurar acabar la vida voceando; y cuando en mí
vuelvo, me hallo tan cansado y molido, que apenas puedo moverme. Mi más
común habitación es en el hueco de un alcornoque, capaz de cubrir este
miserable cuerpo. Los vaqueros y cabreros que andan por estas montañas,
movidos de caridad, me sustentan, poniéndome el manjar por los caminos y
por las peñas por donde entienden que acaso podré pasar y hallarlo; y así,
aunque entonces me falte el juicio, la necesidad natural me da a conocer el
mantenimiento, y despierta en mí el deseo de apetecerlo y la voluntad de
tomarlo. Otras veces me dicen ellos, cuando me encuentran con juicio, que
yo salgo a los caminos y que se lo quito por fuerza, aunque me lo den de
grado, a los pastores que vienen con ello del lugar a las majadas.
»Desta manera paso mi miserable y estrema vida, hasta que el cielo sea
servido de conducirle a su último fin, o de ponerle en mi memoria, para que
no me acuerde de la hermosura y de la traición de Luscinda y del agravio de
don Fernando; que si esto él hace sin quitarme la vida, yo volveré a mejor
discurso mis pensamientos; donde no, no hay sino rogarle que absolutamente
tenga misericordia de mi alma, que yo no siento en mí valor ni fuerzas para
sacar el cuerpo desta estrecheza en que por mi gusto he querido ponerle».
Ésta es, ¡oh señores!, la amarga historia de mi desgracia: decidme si es
tal, que pueda celebrarse con menos sentimientos que los que en mí habéis
visto; y no os canséis en persuadirme ni aconsejarme lo que la razón os
dijere que puede ser bueno para mi remedio, porque ha de aprovechar conmigo
lo que aprovecha la medicina recetada de famoso médico al enfermo que
recebir no la quiere. Yo no quiero salud sin Luscinda; y, pues ella gustó
de ser ajena, siendo, o debiendo ser, mía, guste yo de ser de la
desventura, pudiendo haber sido de la buena dicha. Ella quiso, con su
mudanza, hacer estable mi perdición; yo querré, con procurar perderme,
hacer contenta su voluntad, y será ejemplo a los por venir de que a mí solo
faltó lo que a todos los desdichados sobra, a los cuales suele ser consuelo
la imposibilidad de tenerle, y en mí es causa de mayores sentimientos y
males, porque aun pienso que no se han de acabar con la muerte.

Aquí dio fin Cardenio a su larga plática y tan desdichada como amorosa
historia. Y, al tiempo que el cura se prevenía para decirle algunas razones
de consuelo, le suspendió una voz que llegó a sus oídos, que en lastimados
acentos oyeron que decía lo que se dirá en la cuarta parte desta narración,
que en este punto dio fin a la tercera el sabio y atentado historiador Cide
Hamete Benengeli.

Cuarta parte del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha





Capítulo XXVIII. Que trata de la nueva y agradable aventura que al cura y
barbero sucedió en la mesma sierra


Felicísimos y venturosos fueron los tiempos donde se echó al mundo el
audacísimo caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, pues por haber tenido tan
honrosa determinación como fue el querer resucitar y volver al mundo la ya
perdida y casi muerta orden de la andante caballería, gozamos ahora, en
esta nuestra edad, necesitada de alegres entretenimientos, no sólo de la
dulzura de su verdadera historia, sino de los cuentos y episodios della,
que, en parte, no son menos agradables y artificiosos y verdaderos que la
misma historia; la cual, prosiguiendo su rastrillado, torcido y aspado
hilo, cuenta que, así como el cura comenzó a prevenirse para consolar a
Cardenio, lo impidió una voz que llegó a sus oídos, que, con tristes
acentos, decía desta manera:

-¡Ay Dios! ¿Si será posible que he ya hallado lugar que pueda servir de
escondida sepultura a la carga pesada deste cuerpo, que tan contra mi
voluntad sostengo? Sí será, si la soledad que prometen estas sierras no me
miente. ¡Ay, desdichada, y cuán más agradable compañía harán estos riscos y
malezas a mi intención, pues me darán lugar para que con quejas comunique
mi desgracia al cielo, que no la de ningún hombre humano, pues no hay
ninguno en la tierra de quien se pueda esperar consejo en las dudas, alivio
en las quejas, ni remedio en los males!

Todas estas razones oyeron y percibieron el cura y los que con él estaban,
y por parecerles, como ello era, que allí junto las decían, se levantaron a
buscar el dueño, y no hubieron andado veinte pasos, cuando detrás de un
peñasco vieron, sentado al pie de un fresno, a un mozo vestido como
labrador, al cual, por tener inclinado el rostro, a causa de que se lavaba
los pies en el arroyo que por allí corría, no se le pudieron ver por
entonces. Y ellos llegaron con tanto silencio que dél no fueron sentidos,
ni él estaba a otra cosa atento que a lavarse los pies, que eran tales, que
no parecían sino dos pedazos de blanco cristal que entre las otras piedras
del arroyo se habían nacido. Suspendióles la blancura y belleza de los
pies, pareciéndoles que no estaban hechos a pisar terrones, ni a andar tras
el arado y los bueyes, como mostraba el hábito de su dueño; y así, viendo
que no habían sido sentidos, el cura, que iba delante, hizo señas a los
otros dos que se agazapasen o escondiesen detrás de unos pedazos de peña
que allí había, y así lo hicieron todos, mirando con atención lo que el
mozo hacía; el cual traía puesto un capotillo pardo de dos haldas, muy
ceñido al cuerpo con una toalla blanca. Traía, ansimesmo, unos calzones y
polainas de paño pardo, y en la cabeza una montera parda. Tenía las
polainas levantadas hasta la mitad de la pierna, que, sin duda alguna, de
blanco alabastro parecía. Acabóse de lavar los hermosos pies, y luego, con
un paño de tocar, que sacó debajo de la montera, se los limpió; y, al
querer quitársele, alzó el rostro, y tuvieron lugar los que mirándole
estaban de ver una hermosura incomparable; tal, que Cardenio dijo al cura,
con voz baja:

-Ésta, ya que no es Luscinda, no es persona humana, sino divina.

El mozo se quitó la montera, y, sacudiendo la cabeza a una y a otra parte,
se comenzaron a descoger y desparcir unos cabellos, que pudieran los del
sol tenerles envidia. Con esto conocieron que el que parecía labrador era
mujer, y delicada, y aun la más hermosa que hasta entonces los ojos de los
dos habían visto, y aun los de Cardenio, si no hubieran mirado y conocido a
Luscinda; que después afirmó que sola la belleza de Luscinda podía
contender con aquélla. Los luengos y rubios cabellos no sólo le cubrieron
las espaldas, mas toda en torno la escondieron debajo de ellos; que si no
eran los pies, ninguna otra cosa de su cuerpo se parecía: tales y tantos
eran. En esto, les sirvió de peine unas manos, que si los pies en el agua
habían parecido pedazos de cristal, las manos en los cabellos semejaban
pedazos de apretada nieve; todo lo cual, en más admiración y en más deseo
de saber quién era ponía a los tres que la miraban.

Por esto determinaron de mostrarse, y, al movimiento que hicieron de
ponerse en pie, la hermosa moza alzó la cabeza, y, apartándose los cabellos
de delante de los ojos con entrambas manos, miró los que el ruido hacían; y
apenas los hubo visto, cuando se levantó en pie, y, sin aguardar a calzarse
ni a recoger los cabellos, asió con mucha presteza un bulto, como de ropa,
que junto a sí tenía, y quiso ponerse en huida, llena de turbación y
sobresalto; mas no hubo dado seis pasos cuando, no pudiendo sufrir los
delicados pies la aspereza de las piedras, dio consigo en el suelo. Lo cual
visto por los tres, salieron a ella, y el cura fue el primero que le dijo:
-Deteneos, señora, quienquiera que seáis, que los que aquí veis sólo tienen
intención de serviros. No hay para qué os pongáis en tan impertinente
huida, porque ni vuestros pies lo podrán sufrir ni nosotros consentir.
A todo esto, ella no respondía palabra, atónita y confusa. Llegaron, pues,
a ella, y, asiéndola por la mano el cura, prosiguió diciendo:

-Lo que vuestro traje, señora, nos niega, vuestros cabellos nos descubren:
señales claras que no deben de ser de poco momento las causas que han
disfrazado vuestra belleza en hábito tan indigno, y traídola a tanta
soledad como es ésta, en la cual ha sido ventura el hallaros, si no para
dar remedio a vuestros males, a lo menos para darles consejo, pues ningún
mal puede fatigar tanto, ni llegar tan al estremo de serlo, mientras no
acaba la vida, que rehúya de no escuchar siquiera el consejo que con buena
intención se le da al que lo padece. Así que, señora mía, o señor mío, o lo
que vos quisierdes ser, perded el sobresalto que nuestra vista os ha
causado y contadnos vuestra buena o mala suerte; que en nosotros juntos, o
en cada uno, hallaréis quien os ayude a sentir vuestras desgracias.

En tanto que el cura decía estas razones, estaba la disfrazada moza como
embelesada, mirándolos a todos, sin mover labio ni decir palabra alguna:
bien así como rústico aldeano que de improviso se le muestran cosas raras y
dél jamás vistas. Mas, volviendo el cura a decirle otras razones al mesmo
efeto encaminadas, dando ella un profundo suspiro, rompió el silencio y
dijo:

-Pues que la soledad destas sierras no ha sido parte para encubrirme, ni la
soltura de mis descompuestos cabellos no ha permitido que sea mentirosa mi
lengua, en balde sería fingir yo de nuevo ahora lo que, si se me creyese,
sería más por cortesía que por otra razón alguna. Presupuesto esto, digo,
señores, que os agradezco el ofrecimiento que me habéis hecho, el cual me
ha puesto en obligación de satisfaceros en todo lo que me habéis pedido,
puesto que temo que la relación que os hiciere de mis desdichas os ha de
causar, al par de la compasión, la pesadumbre, porque no habéis de hallar
remedio para remediarlas ni consuelo para entretenerlas. Pero, con todo
esto, porque no ande vacilando mi honra en vuestras intenciones, habiéndome
ya conocido por mujer y viéndome moza, sola y en este traje, cosas todas
juntas, y cada una por sí, que pueden echar por tierra cualquier honesto
crédito, os habré de decir lo que quisiera callar si pudiera.

Todo esto dijo sin parar la que tan hermosa mujer parecía, con tan suelta
lengua, con voz tan suave, que no menos les admiró su discreción que su
hermosura. Y, tornándole a hacer nuevos ofrecimientos y nuevos ruegos para
que lo prometido cumpliese, ella, sin hacerse más de rogar, calzándose con
toda honestidad y recogiendo sus cabellos, se acomodó en el asiento de una
piedra, y, puestos los tres alrededor della, haciéndose fuerza por detener
algunas lágrimas que a los ojos se le venían, con voz reposada y clara,
comenzó la historia de su vida desta manera:

-«En esta Andalucía hay un lugar de quien toma título un duque, que le hace
uno de los que llaman grandes en España. Éste tiene dos hijos: el mayor,
heredero de su estado, y, al parecer, de sus buenas costumbres; y el menor,
no sé yo de qué sea heredero, sino de las traiciones de Vellido y de los
embustes de Galalón. Deste señor son vasallos mis padres, humildes en
linaje, pero tan ricos que si los bienes de su naturaleza igualaran a los
de su fortuna, ni ellos tuvieran más que desear ni yo temiera verme en la
desdicha en que me veo; porque quizá nace mi poca ventura de la que no
tuvieron ellos en no haber nacido ilustres. Bien es verdad que no son tan
bajos que puedan afrentarse de su estado, ni tan altos que a mí me quiten
la imaginación que tengo de que de su humildad viene mi desgracia. Ellos,
en fin, son labradores, gente llana, sin mezcla de alguna raza mal sonante,
y, como suele decirse, cristianos viejos ranciosos; pero tan ricos que su
riqueza y magnífico trato les va poco a poco adquiriendo nombre de
hidalgos, y aun de caballeros. Puesto que de la mayor riqueza y nobleza que
ellos se preciaban era de tenerme a mí por hija; y, así por no tener otra
ni otro que los heredase como por ser padres, y aficionados, yo era una de
las más regaladas hijas que padres jamás regalaron. Era el espejo en que se
miraban, el báculo de su vejez, y el sujeto a quien encaminaban,
midiéndolos con el cielo, todos sus deseos; de los cuales, por ser ellos
tan buenos, los míos no salían un punto. Y del mismo modo que yo era señora
de sus ánimos, ansí lo era de su hacienda: por mí se recebían y despedían
los criados; la razón y cuenta de lo que se sembraba y cogía pasaba por mi
mano; los molinos de aceite, los lagares de vino, el número del ganado
mayor y menor, el de las colmenas. Finalmente, de todo aquello que un tan
rico labrador como mi padre puede tener y tiene, tenía yo la cuenta, y era
la mayordoma y señora, con tanta solicitud mía y con tanto gusto suyo, que
buenamente no acertaré a encarecerlo. Los ratos que del día me quedaban,
después de haber dado lo que convenía a los mayorales, a capataces y a
otros jornaleros, los entretenía en ejercicios que son a las doncellas tan
lícitos como necesarios, como son los que ofrece la aguja y la almohadilla,
y la rueca muchas veces; y si alguna, por recrear el ánimo, estos
ejercicios dejaba, me acogía al entretenimiento de leer algún libro devoto,
o a tocar una arpa, porque la experiencia me mostraba que la música compone
los ánimos descompuestos y alivia los trabajos que nacen del espíritu.
»Ésta, pues, era la vida que yo tenía en casa de mis padres, la cual, si
tan particularmente he contado, no ha sido por ostentación ni por dar a
entender que soy rica, sino porque se advierta cuán sin culpa me he venido
de aquel buen estado que he dicho al infelice en que ahora me hallo. Es,
pues, el caso que, pasando mi vida en tantas ocupaciones y en un
encerramiento tal que al de un monesterio pudiera compararse, sin ser
vista, a mi parecer, de otra persona alguna que de los criados de casa,
porque los días que iba a misa era tan de mañana, y tan acompañada de mi
madre y de otras criadas, y yo tan cubierta y recatada que apenas vían mis
ojos más tierra de aquella donde ponía los pies; y, con todo esto, los del
amor, o los de la ociosidad, por mejor decir, a quien los de lince no
pueden igualarse, me vieron, puestos en la solicitud de don Fernando, que
éste es el nombre del hijo menor del duque que os he contado».

No hubo bien nombrado a don Fernando la que el cuento contaba, cuando a
Cardenio se le mudó la color del rostro, y comenzó a trasudar, con tan
grande alteración que el cura y el barbero, que miraron en ello, temieron
que le venía aquel accidente de locura que habían oído decir que de cuando
en cuando le venía. Mas Cardenio no hizo otra cosa que trasudar y estarse
quedo, mirando de hito en hito a la labradora, imaginando quién ella era;
la cual, sin advertir en los movimientos de Cardenio, prosiguió su
historia, diciendo:

-«Y no me hubieron bien visto cuando, según él dijo después, quedó tan
preso de mis amores cuanto lo dieron bien a entender sus demostraciones.
Mas, por acabar presto con el cuento, que no le tiene, de mis desdichas,
quiero pasar en silencio las diligencias que don Fernando hizo para
declararme su voluntad. Sobornó toda la gente de mi casa, dio y ofreció
dádivas y mercedes a mis parientes. Los días eran todos de fiesta y de
regocijo en mi calle; las noches no dejaban dormir a nadie las músicas. Los
billetes que, sin saber cómo, a mis manos venían, eran infinitos, llenos de
enamoradas razones y ofrecimientos, con menos letras que promesas y
juramentos. Todo lo cual no sólo no me ablandaba, pero me endurecía de
manera como si fuera mi mortal enemigo, y que todas las obras que para
reducirme a su voluntad hacía, las hiciera para el efeto contrario; no
porque a mí me pareciese mal la gentileza de don Fernando, ni que tuviese a
demasía sus solicitudes; porque me daba un no sé qué de contento verme tan
querida y estimada de un tan principal caballero, y no me pesaba ver en sus
papeles mis alabanzas: que en esto, por feas que seamos las mujeres, me
parece a mí que siempre nos da gusto el oír que nos llaman hermosas.
»Pero a todo esto se opone mi honestidad y los consejos continuos que mis
padres me daban, que ya muy al descubierto sabían la voluntad de don
Fernando, porque ya a él no se le daba nada de que todo el mundo la
supiese. Decíanme mis padres que en sola mi virtud y bondad dejaban y
depositaban su honra y fama, y que considerase la desigualdad que había
entre mí y don Fernando, y que por aquí echaría de ver que sus
pensamientos, aunque él dijese otra cosa, mas se encaminaban a su gusto que
a mi provecho; y que si yo quisiese poner en alguna manera algún
inconveniente para que él se dejase de su injusta pretensión, que ellos me
casarían luego con quien yo más gustase: así de los más principales de
nuestro lugar como de todos los circunvecinos, pues todo se podía esperar
de su mucha hacienda y de mi buena fama. Con estos ciertos prometimientos,
y con la verdad que ellos me decían, fortificaba yo mi entereza, y jamás
quise responder a don Fernando palabra que le pudiese mostrar, aunque de
muy lejos, esperanza de alcanzar su deseo.

»Todos estos recatos míos, que él debía de tener por desdenes, debieron de
ser causa de avivar más su lascivo apetito, que este nombre quiero dar a la
voluntad que me mostraba; la cual, si ella fuera como debía, no la
supiérades vosotros ahora, porque hubiera faltado la ocasión de decírosla.
Finalmente, don Fernando supo que mis padres andaban por darme estado, por
quitalle a él la esperanza de poseerme, o, a lo menos, porque yo tuviese
más guardas para guardarme; y esta nueva o sospecha fue causa para que
hiciese lo que ahora oiréis. Y fue que una noche, estando yo en mi aposento
con sola la compañía de una doncella que me servía, teniendo bien cerradas
las puertas, por temor que, por descuido, mi honestidad no se viese en
peligro, sin saber ni imaginar cómo, en medio destos recatos y
prevenciones, y en la soledad deste silencio y encierro, me le hallé
delante, cuya vista me turbó de manera que me quitó la de mis ojos y me
enmudeció la lengua; y así, no fui poderosa de dar voces, ni aun él creo
que me las dejara dar, porque luego se llegó a mí, y, tomándome entre sus
brazos (porque yo, como digo, no tuve fuerzas para defenderme, según estaba
turbada), comenzó a decirme tales razones, que no sé cómo es posible que
tenga tanta habilidad la mentira que las sepa componer de modo que parezcan
tan verdaderas. Hacía el traidor que sus lágrimas acreditasen sus palabras
y los suspiros su intención. Yo, pobrecilla, sola entre los míos, mal
ejercitada en casos semejantes, comencé, no sé en qué modo, a tener por
verdaderas tantas falsedades, pero no de suerte que me moviesen a compasión
menos que buena sus lágrimas y suspiros.

»Y así, pasándoseme aquel sobresalto primero, torné algún tanto a cobrar
mis perdidos espíritus, y con más ánimo del que pensé que pudiera tener, le
dije: ''Si como estoy, señor, en tus brazos, estuviera entre los de un león
fiero y el librarme dellos se me asegurara con que hiciera, o dijera, cosa
que fuera en perjuicio de mi honestidad, así fuera posible hacella o
decilla como es posible dejar de haber sido lo que fue. Así que, si tú
tienes ceñido mi cuerpo con tus brazos, yo tengo atada mi alma con mis
buenos deseos, que son tan diferentes de los tuyos como lo verás si con
hacerme fuerza quisieres pasar adelante en ellos. Tu vasalla soy, pero no
tu esclava; ni tiene ni debe tener imperio la nobleza de tu sangre para
deshonrar y tener en poco la humildad de la mía; y en tanto me estimo yo,
villana y labradora, como tú, señor y caballero. Conmigo no han de ser de
ningún efecto tus fuerzas, ni han de tener valor tus riquezas, ni tus
palabras han de poder engañarme, ni tus suspiros y lágrimas enternecerme.
Si alguna de todas estas cosas que he dicho viera yo en el que mis padres
me dieran por esposo, a su voluntad se ajustara la mía, y mi voluntad de la
suya no saliera; de modo que, como quedara con honra, aunque quedara sin
gusto, de grado te entregara lo que tú, señor, ahora con tanta fuerza
procuras. Todo esto he dicho porque no es pensar que de mí alcance cosa
alguna el que no fuere mi ligítimo esposo''. ''Si no reparas más que en
eso, bellísima Dorotea -(que éste es el nombre desta desdichada), dijo el
desleal caballero-, ves: aquí te doy la mano de serlo tuyo, y sean testigos
desta verdad los cielos, a quien ninguna cosa se asconde, y esta imagen de
Nuestra Señora que aquí tienes''.»

Cuando Cardenio le oyó decir que se llamaba Dorotea, tornó de nuevo a sus
sobresaltos y acabó de confirmar por verdadera su primera opinión; pero no
quiso interromper el cuento, por ver en qué venía a parar lo que él ya casi
sabía; sólo dijo:

-¿Que Dorotea es tu nombre, señora? Otra he oído yo decir del mesmo, que
quizá corre parejas con tus desdichas. Pasa adelante, que tiempo vendrá en
que te diga cosas que te espanten en el mesmo grado que te lastimen.
Reparó Dorotea en las razones de Cardenio y en su estraño y desastrado
traje, y rogóle que si alguna cosa de su hacienda sabía, se la dijese
luego; porque si algo le había dejado bueno la fortuna, era el ánimo que
tenía para sufrir cualquier desastre que le sobreviniese, segura de que, a
su parecer, ninguno podía llegar que el que tenía acrecentase un punto.
-No le perdiera yo, señora -respondió Cardenio-, en decirte lo que pienso,
si fuera verdad lo que imagino; y hasta ahora no se pierde coyuntura, ni a
ti te importa nada el saberlo.

-Sea lo que fuere -respondió Dorotea-, «lo que en mi cuento pasa fue que,
tomando don Fernando una imagen que en aquel aposento estaba, la puso por
testigo de nuestro desposorio. Con palabras eficacísimas y juramentos
estraordinarios, me dio la palabra de ser mi marido, puesto que, antes que
acabase de decirlas, le dije que mirase bien lo que hacía y que considerase
el enojo que su padre había de recebir de verle casado con una villana
vasalla suya; que no le cegase mi hermosura, tal cual era, pues no era
bastante para hallar en ella disculpa de su yerro, y que si algún bien me
quería hacer, por el amor que me tenía, fuese dejar correr mi suerte a lo
igual de lo que mi calidad podía, porque nunca los tan desiguales
casamientos se gozan ni duran mucho en aquel gusto con que se comienzan.
»Todas estas razones que aquí he dicho le dije, y otras muchas de que no me
acuerdo, pero no fueron parte para que él dejase de seguir su intento, bien
ansí como el que no piensa pagar, que, al concertar de la barata, no repara
en inconvenientes. Yo, a esta sazón, hice un breve discurso conmigo, y me
dije a mí mesma: ''Sí, que no seré yo la primera que por vía de matrimonio
haya subido de humilde a grande estado, ni será don Fernando el primero a
quien hermosura, o ciega afición, que es lo más cierto, haya hecho tomar
compañía desigual a su grandeza. Pues si no hago ni mundo ni uso nuevo,
bien es acudir a esta honra que la suerte me ofrece, puesto que en éste no
dure más la voluntad que me muestra de cuanto dure el cumplimiento de su
deseo; que, en fin, para con Dios seré su esposa. Y si quiero con desdenes
despedille, en término le veo que, no usando el que debe, usará el de la
fuerza y vendré a quedar deshonrada y sin disculpa de la culpa que me podía
dar el que no supiere cuán sin ella he venido a este punto. Porque, ¿qué
razones serán bastantes para persuadir a mis padres, y a otros, que este
caballero entró en mi aposento sin consentimiento mío?''

»Todas estas demandas y respuestas revolví yo en un instante en la
imaginación; y, sobre todo, me comenzaron a hacer fuerza y a inclinarme a
lo que fue, sin yo pensarlo, mi perdición: los juramentos de don Fernando,
los testigos que ponía, las lágrimas que derramaba, y, finalmente, su
dispusición y gentileza, que, acompañada con tantas muestras de verdadero
amor, pudieran rendir a otro tan libre y recatado corazón como el mío.
Llamé a mi criada, para que en la tierra acompañase a los testigos del
cielo; tornó don Fernando a reiterar y confirmar sus juramentos; añadió a
los primeros nuevos santos por testigos; echóse mil futuras maldiciones, si
no cumpliese lo que me prometía; volvió a humedecer sus ojos y a acrecentar
sus suspiros; apretóme más entre sus brazos, de los cuales jamás me había
dejado; y con esto, y con volverse a salir del aposento mi doncella, yo
dejé de serlo y él acabó de ser traidor y fementido.

»El día que sucedió a la noche de mi desgracia se venía aun no tan apriesa
como yo pienso que don Fernando deseaba, porque, después de cumplido
aquello que el apetito pide, el mayor gusto que puede venir es apartarse de
donde le alcanzaron. Digo esto porque don Fernando dio priesa por partirse
de mí, y, por industria de mi doncella, que era la misma que allí le había
traído, antes que amaneciese se vio en la calle. Y, al despedirse de mí,
aunque no con tanto ahínco y vehemencia como cuando vino, me dijo que
estuviese segura de su fe y de ser firmes y verdaderos sus juramentos; y,
para más confirmación de su palabra, sacó un rico anillo del dedo y lo puso
en el mío. En efecto, él se fue y yo quedé ni sé si triste o alegre; esto
sé bien decir: que quedé confusa y pensativa, y casi fuera de mí con el
nuevo acaecimiento, y no tuve ánimo, o no se me acordó, de reñir a mi
doncella por la traición cometida de encerrar a don Fernando en mi mismo
aposento, porque aún no me determinaba si era bien o mal el que me había
sucedido. Díjele, al partir, a don Fernando que por el mesmo camino de
aquélla podía verme otras noches, pues ya era suya, hasta que, cuando él
quisiese, aquel hecho se publicase. Pero no vino otra alguna, si no fue la
siguiente, ni yo pude verle en la calle ni en la iglesia en más de un mes;
que en vano me cansé en solicitallo, puesto que supe que estaba en la villa
y que los más días iba a caza, ejercicio de que él era muy aficionado.
»Estos días y estas horas bien sé yo que para mí fueron aciagos y
menguadas, y bien sé que comencé a dudar en ellos, y aun a descreer de la
fe de don Fernando; y sé también que mi doncella oyó entonces las palabras
que en reprehensión de su atrevimiento antes no había oído; y sé que me fue
forzoso tener cuenta con mis lágrimas y con la compostura de mi rostro, por
no dar ocasión a que mis padres me preguntasen que de qué andaba
descontenta y me obligasen a buscar mentiras que decilles. Pero todo esto
se acabó en un punto, llegándose uno donde se atropellaron respectos y se
acabaron los honrados discursos, y adonde se perdió la paciencia y salieron
a plaza mis secretos pensamientos. Y esto fue porque, de allí a pocos días,
se dijo en el lugar como en una ciudad allí cerca se había casado don
Fernando con una doncella hermosísima en todo estremo, y de muy principales
padres, aunque no tan rica que, por la dote, pudiera aspirar a tan noble
casamiento. Díjose que se llamaba Luscinda, con otras cosas que en sus
desposorios sucedieron dignas de admiración.»

Oyó Cardenio el nombre de Luscinda, y no hizo otra cosa que encoger los
hombros, morderse los labios, enarcar las cejas y dejar de allí a poco caer
por sus ojos dos fuentes de lágrimas. Mas no por esto dejó Dorotea de
seguir su cuento, diciendo:

-«Llegó esta triste nueva a mis oídos, y, en lugar de helárseme el corazón
en oílla, fue tanta la cólera y rabia que se encendió en él, que faltó poco
para no salirme por las calles dando voces, publicando la alevosía y
traición que se me había hecho. Mas templóse esta furia por entonces con
pensar de poner aquella mesma noche por obra lo que puse: que fue ponerme
en este hábito, que me dio uno de los que llaman zagales en casa de los
labradores, que era criado de mi padre, al cual descubrí toda mi
desventura, y le rogué me acompañase hasta la ciudad donde entendí que mi
enemigo estaba. Él, después que hubo reprehendido mi atrevimiento y afeado
mi determinación, viéndome resuelta en mi parecer, se ofreció a tenerme
compañía, como él dijo, hasta el cabo del mundo. Luego, al momento, encerré
en una almohada de lienzo un vestido de mujer, y algunas joyas y dineros,
por lo que podía suceder. Y en el silencio de aquella noche, sin dar cuenta
a mi traidora doncella, salí de mi casa, acompañada de mi criado y de
muchas imaginaciones, y me puse en camino de la ciudad a pie, llevada en
vuelo del deseo de llegar, ya que no a estorbar lo que tenía por hecho, a
lo menos a decir a don Fernando me dijese con qué alma lo había hecho.
»Llegué en dos días y medio donde quería, y, en entrando por la ciudad,
pregunté por la casa de los padres de Luscinda, y al primero a quien hice
la pregunta me respondió más de lo que yo quisiera oír. Díjome la casa y
todo lo que había sucedido en el desposorio de su hija, cosa tan pública en
la ciudad, que se hace en corrillos para contarla por toda ella. Díjome que
la noche que don Fernando se desposó con Luscinda, después de haber ella
dado el sí de ser su esposa, le había tomado un recio desmayo, y que,
llegando su esposo a desabrocharle el pecho para que le diese el aire, le
halló un papel escrito de la misma letra de Luscinda, en que decía y
declaraba que ella no podía ser esposa de don Fernando, porque lo era de
Cardenio, que, a lo que el hombre me dijo, era un caballero muy principal
de la mesma ciudad; y que si había dado el sí a don Fernando, fue por no
salir de la obediencia de sus padres. En resolución, tales razones dijo que
contenía el papel, que daba a entender que ella había tenido intención de
matarse en acabándose de desposar, y daba allí las razones por que se había
quitado la vida. Todo lo cual dicen que confirmó una daga que le hallaron
no sé en qué parte de sus vestidos. Todo lo cual visto por don Fernando,
pareciéndole que Luscinda le había burlado y escarnecido y tenido en poco,
arremetió a ella, antes que de su desmayo volviese, y con la misma daga que
le hallaron la quiso dar de puñaladas; y lo hiciera si sus padres y los que
se hallaron presentes no se lo estorbaran. Dijeron más: que luego se
ausentó don Fernando, y que Luscinda no había vuelto de su parasismo hasta
otro día, que contó a sus padres cómo ella era verdadera esposa de aquel
Cardenio que he dicho. Supe más: que el Cardenio, según decían, se halló
presente en los desposorios, y que, en viéndola desposada, lo cual él jamás
pensó, se salió de la ciudad desesperado, dejándole primero escrita una
carta, donde daba a entender el agravio que Luscinda le había hecho, y de
cómo él se iba adonde gentes no le viesen.

»Esto todo era público y notorio en toda la ciudad, y todos hablaban dello;
y más hablaron cuando supieron que Luscinda había faltado de casa de sus
padres y de la ciudad, pues no la hallaron en toda ella, de que perdían el
juicio sus padres y no sabían qué medio se tomar para hallarla. Esto que
supe puso en bando mis esperanzas, y tuve por mejor no haber hallado a don
Fernando, que no hallarle casado, pareciéndome que aún no estaba del todo
cerrada la puerta a mi remedio, dándome yo a entender que podría ser que el
cielo hubiese puesto aquel impedimento en el segundo matrimonio, por
atraerle a conocer lo que al primero debía, y a caer en la cuenta de que
era cristiano y que estaba más obligado a su alma que a los respetos
humanos. Todas estas cosas revolvía en mi fantasía, y me consolaba sin
tener consuelo, fingiendo unas esperanzas largas y desmayadas, para
entretener la vida, que ya aborrezco.

»Estando, pues, en la ciudad, sin saber qué hacerme, pues a don Fernando no
hallaba, llegó a mis oídos un público pregón, donde se prometía grande
hallazgo a quien me hallase, dando las señas de la edad y del mesmo traje
que traía; y oí decir que se decía que me había sacado de casa de mis
padres el mozo que conmigo vino, cosa que me llegó al alma, por ver cuán de
caída andaba mi crédito, pues no bastaba perderle con mi venida, sino
añadir el con quién, siendo subjeto tan bajo y tan indigno de mis buenos
pensamientos. Al punto que oí el pregón, me salí de la ciudad con mi
criado, que ya comenzaba a dar muestras de titubear en la fe que de
fidelidad me tenía prometida, y aquella noche nos entramos por lo espeso
desta montaña, con el miedo de no ser hallados. Pero, como suele decirse
que un mal llama a otro, y que el fin de una desgracia suele ser principio
de otra mayor, así me sucedió a mí, porque mi buen criado, hasta entonces
fiel y seguro, así como me vio en esta soledad, incitado de su mesma
bellaquería antes que de mi hermosura, quiso aprovecharse de la ocasión
que, a su parecer, estos yermos le ofrecían; y, con poca vergüenza y menos
temor de Dios ni respeto mío, me requirió de amores; y, viendo que yo con
feas y justas palabras respondía a las desvergüenzas de sus propósitos,
dejó aparte los ruegos, de quien primero pensó aprovecharse, y comenzó a
usar de la fuerza. Pero el justo cielo, que pocas o ningunas veces deja de
mirar y favorecer a las justas intenciones, favoreció las mías, de manera
que con mis pocas fuerzas, y con poco trabajo, di con él por un
derrumbadero, donde le dejé, ni sé si muerto o si vivo; y luego, con más
ligereza que mi sobresalto y cansancio pedían, me entré por estas montañas,
sin llevar otro pensamiento ni otro disignio que esconderme en ellas y huir
de mi padre y de aquellos que de su parte me andaban buscando.

»Con este deseo, ha no sé cuántos meses que entré en ellas, donde hallé un
ganadero que me llevó por su criado a un lugar que está en las entrañas
desta sierra, al cual he servido de zagal todo este tiempo, procurando
estar siempre en el campo por encubrir estos cabellos que ahora, tan si
pensarlo, me han descubierto. Pero toda mi industria y toda mi solicitud
fue y ha sido de ningún provecho, pues mi amo vino en conocimiento de que
yo no era varón, y nació en él el mesmo mal pensamiento que en mi criado;
y, como no siempre la fortuna con los trabajos da los remedios, no hallé
derrumbadero ni barranco de donde despeñar y despenar al amo, como le hallé
para el criado; y así, tuve por menor inconveniente dejalle y asconderme de
nuevo entre estas asperezas que probar con él mis fuerzas o mis disculpas.
Digo, pues, que me torné a emboscar, y a buscar donde sin impedimento
alguno pudiese con suspiros y lágrimas rogar al cielo se duela de mi
desventura y me dé industria y favor para salir della, o para dejar la vida
entre estas soledades, sin que quede memoria desta triste, que tan sin
culpa suya habrá dado materia para que de ella se hable y murmure en la
suya y en las ajenas tierras.»





Capítulo XXIX. Que trata de la discreción de la hermosa Dorotea, con otras
cosas de mucho gusto y pasatiempo


-Esta es, señores, la verdadera historia de mi tragedia: mirad y juzgad
ahora si los suspiros que escuchastes, las palabras que oístes y las
lágrimas que de mis ojos salían, tenían ocasión bastante para mostrarse en
mayor abundancia; y, considerada la calidad de mi desgracia, veréis que
será en vano el consuelo, pues es imposible el remedio della. Sólo os ruego
(lo que con facilidad podréis y debéis hacer) que me aconsejéis dónde podré
pasar la vida sin que me acabe el temor y sobresalto que tengo de ser
hallada de los que me buscan; que, aunque sé que el mucho amor que mis
padres me tienen me asegura que seré dellos bien recebida, es tanta la
vergüenza que me ocupa sólo el pensar que, no como ellos pensaban, tengo de
parecer a su presencia, que tengo por mejor desterrarme para siempre de ser
vista que no verles el rostro, con pensamiento que ellos miran el mío ajeno
de la honestidad que de mí se debían de tener prometida.

Calló en diciendo esto, y el rostro se le cubrió de un color que mostró
bien claro el sentimiento y vergüenza del alma. En las suyas sintieron los
que escuchado la habían tanta lástima como admiración de su desgracia; y,
aunque luego quisiera el cura consolarla y aconsejarla, tomó primero la
mano Cardenio, diciendo:

-En fin, señora, que tú eres la hermosa Dorotea, la hija única del rico
Clenardo.

Admirada quedó Dorotea cuando oyó el nombre de su padre, y de ver cuán de
poco era el que le nombraba, porque ya se ha dicho de la mala manera que
Cardenio estaba vestido; y así, le dijo:

-Y ¿quién sois vos, hermano, que así sabéis el nombre de mi padre? Porque
yo, hasta ahora, si mal no me acuerdo, en todo el discurso del cuento de mi
desdicha no le he nombrado.

-Soy -respondió Cardenio- aquel sin ventura que, según vos, señora, habéis
dicho, Luscinda dijo que era su esposa. Soy el desdichado Cardenio, a quien
el mal término de aquel que a vos os ha puesto en el que estáis me ha
traído a que me veáis cual me veis: roto, desnudo, falto de todo humano
consuelo y, lo que es peor de todo, falto de juicio, pues no le tengo sino
cuando al cielo se le antoja dármele por algún breve espacio. Yo, Teodora,
soy el que me hallé presente a las sinrazones de don Fernando, y el que
aguardó oír el sí que de ser su esposa pronunció Luscinda. Yo soy el que no
tuvo ánimo para ver en qué paraba su desmayo, ni lo que resultaba del papel
que le fue hallado en el pecho, porque no tuvo el alma sufrimiento para ver
tantas desventuras juntas; y así, dejé la casa y la paciencia, y una carta
que dejé a un huésped mío, a quien rogué que en manos de Luscinda la
pusiese, y víneme a estas soledades, con intención de acabar en ellas la
vida, que desde aquel punto aborrecí como mortal enemiga mía. Mas no ha
querido la suerte quitármela, contentándose con quitarme el juicio, quizá
por guardarme para la buena ventura que he tenido en hallaros; pues, siendo
verdad, como creo que lo es, lo que aquí habéis contado, aún podría ser que
a entrambos nos tuviese el cielo guardado mejor suceso en nuestros
desastres que nosotros pensamos. Porque, presupuesto que Luscinda no puede
casarse con don Fernando, por ser mía, ni don Fernando con ella, por ser
vuestro, y haberlo ella tan manifiestamente declarado, bien podemos esperar
que el cielo nos restituya lo que es nuestro, pues está todavía en ser, y
no se ha enajenado ni deshecho. Y, pues este consuelo tenemos, nacido no de
muy remota esperanza, ni fundado en desvariadas imaginaciones, suplícoos,
señora, que toméis otra resolución en vuestros honrados pensamientos, pues
yo la pienso tomar en los míos, acomodándoos a esperar mejor fortuna; que
yo os juro, por la fe de caballero y de cristiano, de no desampararos hasta
veros en poder de don Fernando, y que, cuando con razones no le pudiere
atraer a que conozca lo que os debe, de usar entonces la libertad que me
concede el ser caballero, y poder con justo título desafialle, en razón de
la sinrazón que os hace, sin acordarme de mis agravios, cuya venganza
dejaré al cielo por acudir en la tierra a los vuestros.

Con lo que Cardenio dijo se acabó de admirar Dorotea, y, por no saber qué
gracias volver a tan grandes ofrecimientos, quiso tomarle los pies para
besárselos; mas no lo consintió Cardenio, y el licenciado respondió por
entrambos, y aprobó el buen discurso de Cardenio, y, sobre todo, les rogó,
aconsejó y persuadió que se fuesen con él a su aldea, donde se podrían
reparar de las cosas que les faltaban, y que allí se daría orden cómo
buscar a don Fernando, o cómo llevar a Dorotea a sus padres, o hacer lo que
más les pareciese conveniente. Cardenio y Dorotea se lo agradecieron, y
acetaron la merced que se les ofrecía. El barbero, que a todo había estado
suspenso y callado, hizo también su buena plática y se ofreció con no menos
voluntad que el cura a todo aquello que fuese bueno para servirles.
Contó asimesmo con brevedad la causa que allí los había traído, con la
estrañeza de la locura de don Quijote, y cómo aguardaban a su escudero, que
había ido a buscalle. Vínosele a la memoria a Cardenio, como por sueños, la
pendencia que con don Quijote había tenido y contóla a los demás, mas no
supo decir por qué causa fue su quistión.

En esto, oyeron voces, y conocieron que el que las daba era Sancho Panza,
que, por no haberlos hallado en el lugar donde los dejó, los llamaba a
voces. Saliéronle al encuentro, y, preguntándole por don Quijote, les dijo
cómo le había hallado desnudo en camisa, flaco, amarillo y muerto de
hambre, y suspirando por su señora Dulcinea; y que, puesto que le había
dicho que ella le mandaba que saliese de aquel lugar y se fuese al del
Toboso, donde le quedaba esperando, había respondido que estaba determinado
de no parecer ante su fermosura fasta que hobiese fecho fazañas que le
ficiesen digno de su gracia. Y que si aquello pasaba adelante, corría
peligro de no venir a ser emperador, como estaba obligado, ni aun
arzobispo, que era lo menos que podía ser. Por eso, que mirasen lo que se
había de hacer para sacarle de allí.

El licenciado le respondió que no tuviese pena, que ellos le sacarían de
allí, mal que le pesase. Contó luego a Cardenio y a Dorotea lo que tenían
pensado para remedio de don Quijote, a lo menos para llevarle a su casa. A
lo cual dijo Dorotea que ella haría la doncella menesterosa mejor que el
barbero, y más, que tenía allí vestidos con que hacerlo al natural, y que
la dejasen el cargo de saber representar todo aquello que fuese menester
para llevar adelante su intento, porque ella había leído muchos libros de
caballerías y sabía bien el estilo que tenían las doncellas cuitadas cuando
pedían sus dones a los andantes caballeros.

-Pues no es menester más -dijo el cura- sino que luego se ponga por obra;
que, sin duda, la buena suerte se muestra en favor nuestro, pues, tan sin
pensarlo, a vosotros, señores, se os ha comenzado a abrir puerta para
vuestro remedio y a nosotros se nos ha facilitado la que habíamos menester.
Sacó luego Dorotea de su almohada una saya entera de cierta telilla rica y
una mantellina de otra vistosa tela verde, y de una cajita un collar y
otras joyas, con que en un instante se adornó de manera que una rica y gran
señora parecía. Todo aquello, y más, dijo que había sacado de su casa para
lo que se ofreciese, y que hasta entonces no se le había ofrecido ocasión
de habello menester. A todos contentó en estremo su mucha gracia, donaire y
hermosura, y confirmaron a don Fernando por de poco conocimiento, pues
tanta belleza desechaba.

Pero el que más se admiró fue Sancho Panza, por parecerle -como era así
verdad- que en todos los días de su vida había visto tan hermosa criatura;
y así, preguntó al cura con grande ahínco le dijese quién era aquella tan
fermosa señora, y qué era lo que buscaba por aquellos andurriales.
-Esta hermosa señora -respondió el cura-, Sancho hermano, es, como quien no
dice nada, es la heredera por línea recta de varón del gran reino de
Micomicón, la cual viene en busca de vuestro amo a pedirle un don, el cual
es que le desfaga un tuerto o agravio que un mal gigante le tiene fecho; y,
a la fama que de buen caballero vuestro amo tiene por todo lo descubierto,
de Guinea ha venido a buscarle esta princesa.

-Dichosa buscada y dichoso hallazgo -dijo a esta sazón Sancho Panza-, y más
si mi amo es tan venturoso que desfaga ese agravio y enderece ese tuerto,
matando a ese hideputa dese gigante que vuestra merced dice; que sí matará
si él le encuentra, si ya no fuese fantasma, que contra las fantasmas no
tiene mi señor poder alguno. Pero una cosa quiero suplicar a vuestra
merced, entre otras, señor licenciado, y es que, porque a mi amo no le tome
gana de ser arzobispo, que es lo que yo temo, que vuestra merced le
aconseje que se case luego con esta princesa, y así quedará imposibilitado
de recebir órdenes arzobispales y vendrá con facilidad a su imperio y yo al
fin de mis deseos; que yo he mirado bien en ello y hallo por mi cuenta que
no me está bien que mi amo sea arzobispo, porque yo soy inútil para la
Iglesia, pues soy casado, y andarme ahora a traer dispensaciones para poder
tener renta por la Iglesia, teniendo, como tengo, mujer y hijos, sería
nunca acabar. Así que, señor, todo el toque está en que mi amo se case
luego con esta señora, que hasta ahora no sé su gracia, y así, no la llamo
por su nombre.

-Llámase -respondió el cura- la princesa Micomicona, porque, llamándose su
reino Micomicón, claro está que ella se ha de llamar así.

-No hay duda en eso -respondió Sancho-, que yo he visto a muchos tomar el
apellido y alcurnia del lugar donde nacieron, llamándose Pedro de Alcalá,
Juan de Úbeda y Diego de Valladolid; y esto mesmo se debe de usar allá en
Guinea: tomar las reinas los nombres de sus reinos.

-Así debe de ser -dijo el cura-; y en lo del casarse vuestro amo, yo haré
en ello todos mis poderíos.

Con lo que quedó tan contento Sancho cuanto el cura admirado de su
simplicidad, y de ver cuán encajados tenía en la fantasía los mesmos
disparates que su amo, pues sin alguna duda se daba a entender que había de
venir a ser emperador.

Ya, en esto, se había puesto Dorotea sobre la mula del cura y el barbero se
había acomodado al rostro la barba de la cola de buey, y dijeron a Sancho
que los guiase adonde don Quijote estaba; al cual advirtieron que no dijese
que conocía al licenciado ni al barbero, porque en no conocerlos consistía
todo el toque de venir a ser emperador su amo; puesto que ni el cura ni
Cardenio quisieron ir con ellos, porque no se le acordase a don Quijote la
pendencia que con Cardenio había tenido, y el cura porque no era menester
por entonces su presencia. Y así, los dejaron ir delante, y ellos los
fueron siguiendo a pie, poco a poco. No dejó de avisar el cura lo que había
de hacer Dorotea; a lo que ella dijo que descuidasen, que todo se haría,
sin faltar punto, como lo pedían y pintaban los libros de caballerías.
Tres cuartos de legua habrían andado, cuando descubrieron a don Quijote
entre unas intricadas peñas, ya vestido, aunque no armado; y, así como
Dorotea le vio y fue informada de Sancho que aquél era don Quijote, dio del
azote a su palafrén, siguiéndole el bien barbado barbero. Y, en llegando
junto a él, el escudero se arrojó de la mula y fue a tomar en los brazos a
Dorotea, la cual, apeándose con grande desenvoltura, se fue a hincar de
rodillas ante las de don Quijote; y, aunque él pugnaba por levantarla,
ella, sin levantarse, le fabló en esta guisa:

-De aquí no me levantaré, ¡oh valeroso y esforzado caballero!, fasta que la
vuestra bondad y cortesía me otorgue un don, el cual redundará en honra y
prez de vuestra persona, y en pro de la más desconsolada y agraviada
doncella que el sol ha visto. Y si es que el valor de vuestro fuerte brazo
corresponde a la voz de vuestra inmortal fama, obligado estáis a favorecer
a la sin ventura que de tan lueñes tierras viene, al olor de vuestro famoso
nombre, buscándoos para remedio de sus desdichas.

-No os responderé palabra, fermosa señora -respondió don Quijote-, ni oiré
más cosa de vuestra facienda, fasta que os levantéis de tierra.

-No me levantaré, señor -respondió la afligida doncella-, si primero, por
la vuestra cortesía, no me es otorgado el don que pido.

-Yo vos le otorgo y concedo -respondió don Quijote-, como no se haya de
cumplir en daño o mengua de mi rey, de mi patria y de aquella que de mi
corazón y libertad tiene la llave.

-No será en daño ni en mengua de los que decís, mi buen señor -replicó la
dolorosa doncella.

Y, estando en esto, se llegó Sancho Panza al oído de su señor y muy pasito
le dijo:

-Bien puede vuestra merced, señor, concederle el don que pide, que no es
cosa de nada: sólo es matar a un gigantazo, y esta que lo pide es la alta
princesa Micomicona, reina del gran reino Micomicón de Etiopía.

-Sea quien fuere -respondió don Quijote-, que yo haré lo que soy obligado y
lo que me dicta mi conciencia, conforme a lo que profesado tengo.

Y, volviéndose a la doncella, dijo:

-La vuestra gran fermosura se levante, que yo le otorgo el don que pedirme
quisiere.

-Pues el que pido es -dijo la doncella- que la vuestra magnánima persona se
venga luego conmigo donde yo le llevare, y me prometa que no se ha de
entremeter en otra aventura ni demanda alguna hasta darme venganza de un
traidor que, contra todo derecho divino y humano, me tiene usurpado mi
reino.

-Digo que así lo otorgo -respondió don Quijote-, y así podéis, señora,
desde hoy más, desechar la malenconía que os fatiga y hacer que cobre
nuevos bríos y fuerzas vuestra desmayada esperanza; que, con el ayuda de
Dios y la de mi brazo, vos os veréis presto restituida en vuestro reino y
sentada en la silla de vuestro antiguo y grande estado, a pesar y a
despecho de los follones que contradecirlo quisieren. Y manos a labor, que
en la tardanza dicen que suele estar el peligro.

La menesterosa doncella pugnó, con mucha porfía, por besarle las manos, mas
don Quijote, que en todo era comedido y cortés caballero, jamás lo
consintió; antes, la hizo levantar y la abrazó con mucha cortesía y
comedimiento, y mandó a Sancho que requiriese las cinchas a Rocinante y le
armase luego al punto. Sancho descolgó las armas, que, como trofeo, de un
árbol estaban pendientes, y, requiriendo las cinchas, en un punto armó a su
señor; el cual, viéndose armado, dijo:

-Vamos de aquí, en el nombre de Dios, a favorecer esta gran señora.
Estábase el barbero aún de rodillas, teniendo gran cuenta de disimular la
risa y de que no se le cayese la barba, con cuya caída quizá quedaran todos
sin conseguir su buena intención; y, viendo que ya el don estaba concedido
y con la diligencia que don Quijote se alistaba para ir a cumplirle, se
levantó y tomó de la otra mano a su señora, y entre los dos la subieron en
la mula. Luego subió don Quijote sobre Rocinante, y el barbero se acomodó
en su cabalgadura, quedándose Sancho a pie, donde de nuevo se le renovó la
pérdida del rucio, con la falta que entonces le hacía; mas todo lo llevaba
con gusto, por parecerle que ya su señor estaba puesto en camino, y muy a
pique, de ser emperador; porque sin duda alguna pensaba que se había de
casar con aquella princesa, y ser, por lo menos, rey de Micomicón. Sólo le
daba pesadumbre el pensar que aquel reino era en tierra de negros, y que la
gente que por sus vasallos le diesen habían de ser todos negros; a lo cual
hizo luego en su imaginación un buen remedio, y díjose a sí mismo:
-¿Qué se me da a mí que mis vasallos sean negros? ¿Habrá más que cargar con
ellos y traerlos a España, donde los podré vender, y adonde me los pagarán
de contado, de cuyo dinero podré comprar algún título o algún oficio con
que vivir descansado todos los días de mi vida? ¡No, sino dormíos, y no
tengáis ingenio ni habilidad para disponer de las cosas y para vender
treinta o diez mil vasallos en dácame esas pajas! Par Dios que los he de
volar, chico con grande, o como pudiere, y que, por negros que sean, los he
de volver blancos o amarillos. ¡Llegaos, que me mamo el dedo!

Con esto, andaba tan solícito y tan contento que se le olvidaba la
pesadumbre de caminar a pie.

Todo esto miraban de entre unas breñas Cardenio y el cura, y no sabían qué
hacerse para juntarse con ellos; pero el cura, que era gran tracista,
imaginó luego lo que harían para conseguir lo que deseaban; y fue que con
unas tijeras que traía en un estuche quitó con mucha presteza la barba a
Cardenio, y vistióle un capotillo pardo que él traía y diole un herreruelo
negro, y él se quedó en calzas y en jubón; y quedó tan otro de lo que antes
parecía Cardenio, que él mesmo no se conociera, aunque a un espejo se
mirara. Hecho esto, puesto ya que los otros habían pasado adelante en tanto
que ellos se disfrazaron, con facilidad salieron al camino real antes que
ellos, porque las malezas y malos pasos de aquellos lugares no concedían
que anduviesen tanto los de a caballo como los de a pie. En efeto, ellos se
pusieron en el llano, a la salida de la sierra, y, así como salió della don
Quijote y sus camaradas, el cura se le puso a mirar muy de espacio, dando
señales de que le iba reconociendo; y, al cabo de haberle una buena pieza
estado mirando, se fue a él abiertos los brazos y diciendo a voces:
-Para bien sea hallado el espejo de la caballería, el mi buen compatriote
don Quijote de la Mancha, la flor y la nata de la gentileza, el amparo y
remedio de los menesterosos, la quintaesencia de los caballeros andantes.
Y, diciendo esto, tenía abrazado por la rodilla de la pierna izquierda a
don Quijote; el cual, espantado de lo que veía y oía decir y hacer aquel
hombre, se le puso a mirar con atención, y, al fin, le conoció y quedó como
espantado de verle, y hizo grande fuerza por apearse; mas el cura no lo
consintió, por lo cual don Quijote decía:

-Déjeme vuestra merced, señor licenciado, que no es razón que yo esté a
caballo, y una tan reverenda persona como vuestra merced esté a pie.
-Eso no consentiré yo en ningún modo -dijo el cura-: estése la vuestra
grandeza a caballo, pues estando a caballo acaba las mayores fazañas y
aventuras que en nuestra edad se han visto; que a mí, aunque indigno
sacerdote, bastaráme subir en las ancas de una destas mulas destos señores
que con vuestra merced caminan, si no lo han por enojo. Y aun haré cuenta
que voy caballero sobre el caballo Pegaso, o sobre la cebra o alfana en que
cabalgaba aquel famoso moro Muzaraque, que aún hasta ahora yace encantado
en la gran cuesta Zulema, que dista poco de la gran Compluto.

-Aún no caía yo en tanto, mi señor licenciado -respondió don Quijote-; y yo
sé que mi señora la princesa será servida, por mi amor, de mandar a su
escudero dé a vuestra merced la silla de su mula, que él podrá acomodarse
en las ancas, si es que ella las sufre.

-Sí sufre, a lo que yo creo -respondió la princesa-; y también sé que no
será menester mandárselo al señor mi escudero, que él es tan cortés y tan
cortesano que no consentirá que una persona eclesiástica vaya a pie,
pudiendo ir a caballo.

-Así es -respondió el barbero.

Y, apeándose en un punto, convidó al cura con la silla, y él la tomó sin
hacerse mucho de rogar. Y fue el mal que al subir a las ancas el barbero,
la mula, que, en efeto, era de alquiler, que para decir que era mala esto
basta, alzó un poco los cuartos traseros y dio dos coces en el aire, que, a
darlas en el pecho de maese Nicolás, o en la cabeza, él diera al diablo la
venida por don Quijote. Con todo eso, le sobresaltaron de manera que cayó
en el suelo, con tan poco cuidado de las barbas, que se le cayeron en el
suelo; y, como se vio sin ellas, no tuvo otro remedio sino acudir a
cubrirse el rostro con ambas manos y a quejarse que le habían derribado las
muelas. Don Quijote, como vio todo aquel mazo de barbas, sin quijadas y sin
sangre, lejos del rostro del escudero caído, dijo:

-¡Vive Dios, que es gran milagro éste! ¡Las barbas le ha derribado y
arrancado del rostro, como si las quitaran aposta!

El cura, que vio el peligro que corría su invención de ser descubierta,
acudió luego a las barbas y fuese con ellas adonde yacía maese Nicolás,
dando aún voces todavía, y de un golpe, llegándole la cabeza a su pecho, se
las puso, murmurando sobre él unas palabras, que dijo que era cierto
ensalmo apropiado para pegar barbas, como lo verían; y, cuando se las tuvo
puestas, se apartó, y quedó el escudero tan bien barbado y tan sano como de
antes, de que se admiró don Quijote sobremanera, y rogó al cura que cuando
tuviese lugar le enseñase aquel ensalmo; que él entendía que su virtud a
más que pegar barbas se debía de estender, pues estaba claro que de donde
las barbas se quitasen había de quedar la carne llagada y maltrecha, y que,
pues todo lo sanaba, a más que barbas aprovechaba.

-Así es -dijo el cura, y prometió de enseñársele en la primera ocasión.
Concertáronse que por entonces subiese el cura, y a trechos se fuesen los
tres mudando, hasta que llegasen a la venta, que estaría hasta dos leguas
de allí. Puestos los tres a caballo, es a saber, don Quijote, la princesa y
el cura, y los tres a pie, Cardenio, el barbero y Sancho Panza, don Quijote
dijo a la doncella:

-Vuestra grandeza, señora mía, guíe por donde más gusto le diere.

Y, antes que ella respondiese, dijo el licenciado:

-¿Hacia qué reino quiere guiar la vuestra señoría? ¿Es, por ventura, hacia
el de Micomicón?; que sí debe de ser, o yo sé poco de reinos.

Ella, que estaba bien en todo, entendió que había de responder que sí; y
así, dijo:

-Sí, señor, hacia ese reino es mi camino.

-Si así es -dijo el cura-, por la mitad de mi pueblo hemos de pasar, y de
allí tomará vuestra merced la derrota de Cartagena, donde se podrá embarcar
con la buena ventura; y si hay viento próspero, mar tranquilo y sin
borrasca, en poco menos de nueve años se podrá estar a vista de la gran
laguna Meona, digo, Meótides, que está poco más de cien jornadas más acá
del reino de vuestra grandeza.

-Vuestra merced está engañado, señor mío -dijo ella-, porque no ha dos años
que yo partí dél, y en verdad que nunca tuve buen tiempo, y, con todo eso,
he llegado a ver lo que tanto deseaba, que es al señor don Quijote de la
Mancha, cuyas nuevas llegaron a mis oídos así como puse los pies en España,
y ellas me movieron a buscarle, para encomendarme en su cortesía y fiar mi
justicia del valor de su invencible brazo.

-No más: cesen mis alabanzas -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, porque soy
enemigo de todo género de adulación; y, aunque ésta no lo sea, todavía
ofenden mis castas orejas semejantes pláticas. Lo que yo sé decir, señora
mía, que ora tenga valor o no, el que tuviere o no tuviere se ha de emplear
en vuestro servicio hasta perder la vida; y así, dejando esto para su
tiempo, ruego al señor licenciado me diga qué es la causa que le ha traído
por estas partes, tan solo, y tan sin criados, y tan a la ligera, que me
pone espanto.

-A eso yo responderé con brevedad -respondió el cura-, porque sabrá vuestra
merced, señor don Quijote, que yo y maese Nicolás, nuestro amigo y nuestro
barbero, íbamos a Sevilla a cobrar cierto dinero que un pariente mío que ha
muchos años que pasó a Indias me había enviado, y no tan pocos que no pasan
de sesenta mil pesos ensayados, que es otro que tal; y, pasando ayer por
estos lugares, nos salieron al encuentro cuatro salteadores y nos quitaron
hasta las barbas; y de modo nos las quitaron, que le convino al barbero
ponérselas postizas; y aun a este mancebo que aquí va -señalando a
Cardenio- le pusieron como de nuevo. Y es lo bueno que es pública fama por
todos estos contornos que los que nos saltearon son de unos galeotes que
dicen que libertó, casi en este mesmo sitio, un hombre tan valiente que, a
pesar del comisario y de las guardas, los soltó a todos; y, sin duda
alguna, él debía de estar fuera de juicio, o debe de ser tan grande bellaco
como ellos, o algún hombre sin alma y sin conciencia, pues quiso soltar al
lobo entre las ovejas, a la raposa entre las gallinas, a la mosca entre la
miel; quiso defraudar la justicia, ir contra su rey y señor natural, pues
fue contra sus justos mandamientos. Quiso, digo, quitar a las galeras sus
pies, poner en alboroto a la Santa Hermandad, que había muchos años que
reposaba; quiso, finalmente, hacer un hecho por donde se pierda su alma y
no se gane su cuerpo.

Habíales contado Sancho al cura y al barbero la aventura de los galeotes,
que acabó su amo con tanta gloria suya, y por esto cargaba la mano el cura
refiriéndola, por ver lo que hacía o decía don Quijote; al cual se le
mudaba la color a cada palabra, y no osaba decir que él había sido el
libertador de aquella buena gente.

-Éstos, pues -dijo el cura-, fueron los que nos robaron; que Dios, por su
misericordia, se lo perdone al que no los dejó llevar al debido suplicio.





Capítulo XXX. Que trata del gracioso artificio y orden que se tuvo en sacar
a nuestro enamorado caballero de la asperísima penitencia en que se había
puesto


No hubo bien acabado el cura, cuando Sancho dijo:

-Pues mía fe, señor licenciado, el que hizo esa fazaña fue mi amo, y no
porque yo no le dije antes y le avisé que mirase lo que hacía, y que era
pecado darles libertad, porque todos iban allí por grandísimos bellacos.
-¡Majadero! -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, a los caballeros andantes no
les toca ni atañe averiguar si los afligidos, encadenados y opresos que
encuentran por los caminos van de aquella manera, o están en aquella
angustia, por sus culpas o por sus gracias; sólo le toca ayudarles como a
menesterosos, poniendo los ojos en sus penas y no en sus bellaquerías. Yo
topé un rosario y sarta de gente mohína y desdichada, y hice con ellos lo
que mi religión me pide, y lo demás allá se avenga; y a quien mal le ha
parecido, salvo la santa dignidad del señor licenciado y su honrada
persona, digo que sabe poco de achaque de caballería, y que miente como un
hideputa y mal nacido; y esto le haré conocer con mi espada, donde más
largamente se contiene.

Y esto dijo afirmándose en los estribos y calándose el morrión; porque la
bacía de barbero, que a su cuenta era el yelmo de Mambrino, llevaba colgado
del arzón delantero, hasta adobarla del mal tratamiento que la hicieron los
galeotes.

Dorotea, que era discreta y de gran donaire, como quien ya sabía el
menguado humor de don Quijote y que todos hacían burla dél, sino Sancho
Panza, no quiso ser para menos, y, viéndole tan enojado, le dijo:
-Señor caballero, miémbresele a la vuestra merced el don que me tiene
prometido, y que, conforme a él, no puede entremeterse en otra aventura,
por urgente que sea; sosiegue vuestra merced el pecho, que si el señor
licenciado supiera que por ese invicto brazo habían sido librados los
galeotes, él se diera tres puntos en la boca, y aun se mordiera tres veces
la lengua, antes que haber dicho palabra que en despecho de vuestra merced
redundara.

-Eso juro yo bien -dijo el cura-, y aun me hubiera quitado un bigote.
-Yo callaré, señora mía -dijo don Quijote-, y reprimiré la justa cólera que
ya en mi pecho se había levantado, y iré quieto y pacífico hasta tanto que
os cumpla el don prometido; pero, en pago deste buen deseo, os suplico me
digáis, si no se os hace de mal, cuál es la vuestra cuita y cuántas,
quiénes y cuáles son las personas de quien os tengo de dar debida,
satisfecha y entera venganza.

-Eso haré yo de gana -respondió Dorotea-, si es que no os enfadan oír
lástimas y desgracias.

-No enfadará, señora mía -respondió don Quijote.

A lo que respondió Dorotea:

-Pues así es, esténme vuestras mercedes atentos.

No hubo ella dicho esto, cuando Cardenio y el barbero se le pusieron al
lado, deseosos de ver cómo fingía su historia la discreta Dorotea; y lo
mismo hizo Sancho, que tan engañado iba con ella como su amo. Y ella,
después de haberse puesto bien en la silla y prevenídose con toser y hacer
otros ademanes, con mucho donaire, comenzó a decir desta manera:
-«Primeramente, quiero que vuestras mercedes sepan, señores míos, que a mí
me llaman...»

Y detúvose aquí un poco, porque se le olvidó el nombre que el cura le había
puesto; pero él acudió al remedio, porque entendió en lo que reparaba, y
dijo:

-No es maravilla, señora mía, que la vuestra grandeza se turbe y empache
contando sus desventuras, que ellas suelen ser tales, que muchas veces
quitan la memoria a los que maltratan, de tal manera que aun de sus mesmos
nombres no se les acuerda, como han hecho con vuestra gran señoría, que se
ha olvidado que se llama la princesa Micomicona, legítima heredera del gran
reino Micomicón; y con este apuntamiento puede la vuestra grandeza reducir
ahora fácilmente a su lastimada memoria todo aquello que contar quisiere.
-Así es la verdad -respondió la doncella-, y desde aquí adelante creo que
no será menester apuntarme nada, que yo saldré a buen puerto con mi
verdadera historia. «La cual es que el rey mi padre, que se llama Tinacrio
el Sabidor, fue muy docto en esto que llaman el arte mágica, y alcanzó por
su ciencia que mi madre, que se llamaba la reina Jaramilla, había de morir
primero que él, y que de allí a poco tiempo él también había de pasar desta
vida y yo había de quedar huérfana de padre y madre. Pero decía él que no
le fatigaba tanto esto cuanto le ponía en confusión saber, por cosa muy
cierta, que un descomunal gigante, señor de una grande ínsula, que casi
alinda con nuestro reino, llamado Pandafilando de la Fosca Vista (porque es
cosa averiguada que, aunque tiene los ojos en su lugar y derechos, siempre
mira al revés, como si fuese bizco, y esto lo hace él de maligno y por
poner miedo y espanto a los que mira); digo que supo que este gigante, en
sabiendo mi orfandad, había de pasar con gran poderío sobre mi reino y me
lo había de quitar todo, sin dejarme una pequeña aldea donde me recogiese;
pero que podía escusar toda esta ruina y desgracia si yo me quisiese casar
con él; mas, a lo que él entendía, jamás pensaba que me vendría a mí en
voluntad de hacer tan desigual casamiento; y dijo en esto la pura verdad,
porque jamás me ha pasado por el pensamiento casarme con aquel gigante,
pero ni con otro alguno, por grande y desaforado que fuese. Dijo también mi
padre que, después que él fuese muerto y viese yo que Pandafilando
comenzaba a pasar sobre mi reino, que no aguardase a ponerme en defensa,
porque sería destruirme, sino que libremente le dejase desembarazado el
reino, si quería escusar la muerte y total destruición de mis buenos y
leales vasallos, porque no había de ser posible defenderme de la endiablada
fuerza del gigante; sino que luego, con algunos de los míos, me pusiese en
camino de las Españas, donde hallaría el remedio de mis males hallando a un
caballero andante, cuya fama en este tiempo se estendería por todo este
reino, el cual se había de llamar, si mal no me acuerdo, don Azote o don
Gigote.»

-Don Quijote diría, señora -dijo a esta sazón Sancho Panza-, o, por otro
nombre, el Caballero de la Triste Figura.

-Así es la verdad -dijo Dorotea-. «Dijo más: que había de ser alto de
cuerpo, seco de rostro, y que en el lado derecho, debajo del hombro
izquierdo, o por allí junto, había de tener un lunar pardo con ciertos
cabellos a manera de cerdas.»

En oyendo esto don Quijote, dijo a su escudero:

-Ten aquí, Sancho, hijo, ayúdame a desnudar, que quiero ver si soy el
caballero que aquel sabio rey dejó profetizado.

-Pues, ¿para qué quiere vuestra merced desnudarse? -dijo Dorotea.
-Para ver si tengo ese lunar que vuestro padre dijo -respondió don Quijote.
-No hay para qué desnudarse -dijo Sancho-, que yo sé que tiene vuestra
merced un lunar desas señas en la mitad del espinazo, que es señal de ser
hombre fuerte.

-Eso basta -dijo Dorotea-, porque con los amigos no se ha de mirar en pocas
cosas, y que esté en el hombro o que esté en el espinazo, importa poco;
basta que haya lunar, y esté donde estuviere, pues todo es una mesma carne;
y, sin duda, acertó mi buen padre en todo, y yo he acertado en encomendarme
al señor don Quijote, que él es por quien mi padre dijo, pues las señales
del rostro vienen con las de la buena fama que este caballero tiene no sólo
en España, pero en toda la Mancha, pues apenas me hube desembarcado en
Osuna, cuando oí decir tantas hazañas suyas, que luego me dio el alma que
era el mesmo que venía a buscar.

-Pues, ¿cómo se desembarcó vuestra merced en Osuna, señora mía -preguntó
don Quijote-, si no es puerto de mar?

Mas, antes que Dorotea respondiese, tomó el cura la mano y dijo:

-Debe de querer decir la señora princesa que, después que desembarcó en
Málaga, la primera parte donde oyó nuevas de vuestra merced fue en Osuna.
-Eso quise decir -dijo Dorotea.

-Y esto lleva camino -dijo el cura-, y prosiga vuestra majestad adelante.
-No hay que proseguir -respondió Dorotea-, sino que, finalmente, mi suerte
ha sido tan buena en hallar al señor don Quijote, que ya me cuento y tengo
por reina y señora de todo mi reino, pues él, por su cortesía y
magnificencia, me ha prometido el don de irse conmigo dondequiera que yo le
llevare, que no será a otra parte que a ponerle delante de Pandafilando de
la Fosca Vista, para que le mate y me restituya lo que tan contra razón me
tiene usurpado: que todo esto ha de suceder a pedir de boca, pues así lo
dejó profetizado Tinacrio el Sabidor, mi buen padre; el cual también dejó
dicho y escrito en letras caldeas, o griegas, que yo no las sé leer, que si
este caballero de la profecía, después de haber degollado al gigante,
quisiese casarse conmigo, que yo me otorgase luego sin réplica alguna por
su legítima esposa, y le diese la posesión de mi reino, junto con la de mi
persona.

-¿Qué te parece, Sancho amigo? -dijo a este punto don Quijote-. ¿No oyes lo
que pasa? ¿No te lo dije yo? Mira si tenemos ya reino que mandar y reina
con quien casar.

-¡Eso juro yo -dijo Sancho- para el puto que no se casare en abriendo el
gaznatico al señor Pandahilado! Pues, ¡monta que es mala la reina! ¡Así se
me vuelvan las pulgas de la cama!

Y, diciendo esto, dio dos zapatetas en el aire, con muestras de grandísimo
contento, y luego fue a tomar las riendas de la mula de Dorotea, y,
haciéndola detener, se hincó de rodillas ante ella, suplicándole le diese
las manos para besárselas, en señal que la recibía por su reina y señora.
¿Quién no había de reír de los circustantes, viendo la locura del amo y la
simplicidad del criado? En efecto, Dorotea se las dio, y le prometió de
hacerle gran señor en su reino, cuando el cielo le hiciese tanto bien que
se lo dejase cobrar y gozar. Agradecióselo Sancho con tales palabras que
renovó la risa en todos.

-Ésta, señores -prosiguió Dorotea-, es mi historia: sólo resta por deciros
que de cuanta gente de acompañamiento saqué de mi reino no me ha quedado
sino sólo este buen barbado escudero, porque todos se anegaron en una gran
borrasca que tuvimos a vista del puerto, y él y yo salimos en dos tablas a
tierra, como por milagro; y así, es todo milagro y misterio el discurso de
mi vida, como lo habréis notado. Y si en alguna cosa he andado demasiada, o
no tan acertada como debiera, echad la culpa a lo que el señor licenciado
dijo al principio de mi cuento: que los trabajos continuos y
extraordinarios quitan la memoria al que los padece.

-Ésa no me quitarán a mí, ¡oh alta y valerosa señora! -dijo don Quijote-,
cuantos yo pasare en serviros, por grandes y no vistos que sean; y así, de
nuevo confirmo el don que os he prometido, y juro de ir con vos al cabo del
mundo, hasta verme con el fiero enemigo vuestro, a quien pienso, con el
ayuda de Dios y de mi brazo, tajar la cabeza soberbia con los filos
desta... no quiero decir buena espada, merced a Ginés de Pasamonte, que me
llevó la mía.

Esto dijo entre dientes, y prosiguió diciendo:

-Y después de habérsela tajado y puéstoos en pacífica posesión de vuestro
estado, quedará a vuestra voluntad hacer de vuestra persona lo que más en
talante os viniere; porque, mientras que yo tuviere ocupada la memoria y
cautiva la voluntad, perdido el entendimiento, a aquella..., y no digo más,
no es posible que yo arrostre, ni por pienso, el casarme, aunque fuese con
el ave fénix.

Parecióle tan mal a Sancho lo que últimamente su amo dijo acerca de no
querer casarse, que, con grande enojo, alzando la voz, dijo:

-Voto a mí, y juro a mí, que no tiene vuestra merced, señor don Quijote,
cabal juicio. Pues, ¿cómo es posible que pone vuestra merced en duda el
casarse con tan alta princesa como aquésta? ¿Piensa que le ha de ofrecer la
fortuna, tras cada cantillo, semejante ventura como la que ahora se le
ofrece? ¿Es, por dicha, más hermosa mi señora Dulcinea? No, por cierto, ni
aun con la mitad, y aun estoy por decir que no llega a su zapato de la que
está delante. Así, noramala alcanzaré yo el condado que espero, si vuestra
merced se anda a pedir cotufas en el golfo. Cásese, cásese luego,
encomiéndole yo a Satanás, y tome ese reino que se le viene a las manos de
vobis, vobis, y, en siendo rey, hágame marqués o adelantado, y luego,
siquiera se lo lleve el diablo todo.

Don Quijote, que tales blasfemias oyó decir contra su señora Dulcinea, no
lo pudo sufrir, y, alzando el lanzón, sin hablalle palabra a Sancho y sin
decirle esta boca es mía, le dio tales dos palos que dio con él en tierra;
y si no fuera porque Dorotea le dio voces que no le diera más, sin duda le
quitara allí la vida.

-¿Pensáis -le dijo a cabo de rato-, villano ruin, que ha de haber lugar
siempre para ponerme la mano en la horcajadura, y que todo ha de ser errar
vos y perdonaros yo? Pues no lo penséis, bellaco descomulgado, que sin duda
lo estás, pues has puesto lengua en la sin par Dulcinea. ¿Y no sabéis vos,
gañán, faquín, belitre, que si no fuese por el valor que ella infunde en mi
brazo, que no le tendría yo para matar una pulga? Decid, socarrón de lengua
viperina, ¿y quién pensáis que ha ganado este reino y cortado la cabeza a
este gigante, y héchoos a vos marqués, que todo esto doy ya por hecho y por
cosa pasada en cosa juzgada, si no es el valor de Dulcinea, tomando a mi
brazo por instrumento de sus hazañas? Ella pelea en mí, y vence en mí, y yo
vivo y respiro en ella, y tengo vida y ser. ¡Oh hideputa bellaco, y cómo
sois desagradecido: que os veis levantado del polvo de la tierra a ser
señor de título, y correspondéis a tan buena obra con decir mal de quien os
la hizo!

No estaba tan maltrecho Sancho que no oyese todo cuanto su amo le decía, y,
levantándose con un poco de presteza, se fue a poner detrás del palafrén de
Dorotea, y desde allí dijo a su amo:

-Dígame, señor: si vuestra merced tiene determinado de no casarse con esta
gran princesa, claro está que no será el reino suyo; y, no siéndolo, ¿qué
mercedes me puede hacer? Esto es de lo que yo me quejo; cásese vuestra
merced una por una con esta reina, ahora que la tenemos aquí como llovida
del cielo, y después puede volverse con mi señora Dulcinea; que reyes debe
de haber habido en el mundo que hayan sido amancebados. En lo de la
hermosura no me entremeto; que, en verdad, si va a decirla, que entrambas
me parecen bien, puesto que yo nunca he visto a la señora Dulcinea.
-¿Cómo que no la has visto, traidor blasfemo? -dijo don Quijote-. Pues, ¿no
acabas de traerme ahora un recado de su parte?

-Digo que no la he visto tan despacio -dijo Sancho- que pueda haber notado
particularmente su hermosura y sus buenas partes punto por punto; pero así,
a bulto, me parece bien.

-Ahora te disculpo -dijo don Quijote-, y perdóname el enojo que te he dado,
que los primeros movimientos no son en manos de los hombres.

-Ya yo lo veo -respondió Sancho-; y así, en mí la gana de hablar siempre es
primero movimiento, y no puedo dejar de decir, por una vez siquiera, lo que
me viene a la lengua.

-Con todo eso -dijo don Quijote-, mira, Sancho, lo que hablas, porque
tantas veces va el cantarillo a la fuente..., y no te digo más.

-Ahora bien -respondió Sancho-, Dios está en el cielo, que ve las trampas,
y será juez de quién hace más mal: yo en no hablar bien, o vuestra merced
en obrallo.

-No haya más -dijo Dorotea-: corred, Sancho, y besad la mano a vuestro
señor, y pedilde perdón, y de aquí adelante andad más atentado en vuestras
alabanzas y vituperios, y no digáis mal de aquesa señora Tobosa, a quien yo
no conozco si no es para servilla, y tened confianza en Dios, que no os ha
de faltar un estado donde viváis como un príncipe.

Fue Sancho cabizbajo y pidió la mano a su señor, y él se la dio con
reposado continente; y, después que se la hubo besado, le echó la
bendición, y dijo a Sancho que se adelantasen un poco, que tenía que
preguntalle y que departir con él cosas de mucha importancia. Hízolo así
Sancho y apartáronse los dos algo adelante, y díjole don Quijote:
-Después que veniste, no he tenido lugar ni espacio para preguntarte muchas
cosas de particularidad acerca de la embajada que llevaste y de la
respuesta que trujiste; y ahora, pues la fortuna nos ha concedido tiempo y
lugar, no me niegues tú la ventura que puedes darme con tan buenas nuevas.
-Pregunte vuestra merced lo que quisiere -respondió Sancho-, que a todo
daré tan buena salida como tuve la entrada. Pero suplico a vuestra merced,
señor mío, que no sea de aquí adelante tan vengativo.

-¿Por qué lo dices, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-Dígolo -respondió- porque estos palos de agora más fueron por la pendencia
que entre los dos trabó el diablo la otra noche, que por lo que dije contra
mi señora Dulcinea, a quien amo y reverencio como a una reliquia, aunque en
ella no lo haya, sólo por ser cosa de vuestra merced.

-No tornes a esas pláticas, Sancho, por tu vida -dijo don Quijote-, que me
dan pesadumbre; ya te perdoné entonces, y bien sabes tú que suele decirse:
a pecado nuevo, penitencia nueva.

En tanto que los dos iban en estas pláticas, dijo el cura a Dorotea que
había andado muy discreta, así en el cuento como en la brevedad dél, y en
la similitud que tuvo con los de los libros de caballerías. Ella dijo que
muchos ratos se había entretenido en leellos, pero que no sabía ella dónde
eran las provincias ni puertos de mar, y que así había dicho a tiento que
se había desembarcado en Osuna.

-Yo lo entendí así -dijo el cura-, y por eso acudí luego a decir lo que
dije, con que se acomodó todo. Pero, ¿no es cosa estraña ver con cuánta
facilidad cree este desventurado hidalgo todas estas invenciones y
mentiras, sólo porque llevan el estilo y modo de las necedades de sus
libros?

-Sí es -dijo Cardenio-, y tan rara y nunca vista, que yo no sé si queriendo
inventarla y fabricarla mentirosamente, hubiera tan agudo ingenio que
pudiera dar en ella.

-Pues otra cosa hay en ello -dijo el cura-: que fuera de las simplicidades
que este buen hidalgo dice tocantes a su locura, si le tratan de otras
cosas, discurre con bonísimas razones y muestra tener un entendimiento
claro y apacible en todo. De manera que, como no le toquen en sus
caballerías, no habrá nadie que le juzgue sino por de muy buen
entendimiento.

En tanto que ellos iban en esta conversación, prosiguió don Quijote con la
suya y dijo a Sancho:

-Echemos, Panza amigo, pelillos a la mar en esto de nuestras pendencias, y
dime ahora, sin tener cuenta con enojo ni rencor alguno: ¿Dónde, cómo y
cuándo hallaste a Dulcinea? ¿Qué hacía? ¿Qué le dijiste? ¿Qué te respondió?
¿Qué rostro hizo cuando leía mi carta? ¿Quién te la trasladó? Y todo
aquello que vieres que en este caso es digno de saberse, de preguntarse y
satisfacerse, sin que añadas o mientas por darme gusto, ni menos te acortes
por no quitármele.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, si va a decir la verdad, la carta no me la
trasladó nadie, porque yo no llevé carta alguna.

-Así es como tú dices -dijo don Quijote-, porque el librillo de memoria
donde yo la escribí le hallé en mi poder a cabo de dos días de tu partida,
lo cual me causó grandísima pena, por no saber lo que habías tú de hacer
cuando te vieses sin carta, y creí siempre que te volvieras desde el lugar
donde la echaras menos.

-Así fuera -respondió Sancho-, si no la hubiera yo tomado en la memoria
cuando vuestra merced me la leyó, de manera que se la dije a un sacristán,
que me la trasladó del entendimiento, tan punto por punto, que dijo que en
todos los días de su vida, aunque había leído muchas cartas de descomunión,
no había visto ni leído tan linda carta como aquélla.

-Y ¿tiénesla todavía en la memoria, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-No, señor -respondió Sancho-, porque después que la di, como vi que no
había de ser de más provecho, di en olvidalla. Y si algo se me acuerda, es
aquello del sobajada, digo, del soberana señora, y lo último: Vuestro hasta
la muerte, el Caballero de la Triste Figura. Y, en medio destas dos cosas,
le puse más de trecientas almas, y vidas, y ojos míos.





Capítulo XXXI. De los sabrosos razonamientos que pasaron entre don Quijote
y Sancho Panza, su escudero, con otros sucesos


-Todo eso no me descontenta; prosigue adelante -dijo don Quijote-.
Llegaste, ¿y qué hacía aquella reina de la hermosura? A buen seguro que la
hallaste ensartando perlas, o bordando alguna empresa con oro de cañutillo
para este su cautivo caballero.

-No la hallé -respondió Sancho- sino ahechando dos hanegas de trigo en un
corral de su casa.

-Pues haz cuenta -dijo don Quijote- que los granos de aquel trigo eran
granos de perlas, tocados de sus manos. Y si miraste, amigo, el trigo ¿era
candeal, o trechel?

-No era sino rubión -respondió Sancho.

-Pues yo te aseguro -dijo don Quijote- que, ahechado por sus manos, hizo
pan candeal, sin duda alguna. Pero pasa adelante: cuando le diste mi carta,
¿besóla? ¿Púsosela sobre la cabeza? ¿Hizo alguna ceremonia digna de tal
carta, o qué hizo?

-Cuando yo se la iba a dar -respondió Sancho-, ella estaba en la fuga del
meneo de una buena parte de trigo que tenía en la criba, y díjome: ''Poned,
amigo, esa carta sobre aquel costal, que no la puedo leer hasta que acabe
de acribar todo lo que aquí está''.

-¡Discreta señora! -dijo don Quijote-. Eso debió de ser por leerla despacio
y recrearse con ella. Adelante, Sancho: y, en tanto que estaba en su
menester, ¿qué coloquios pasó contigo? ¿Qué te preguntó de mí? Y tú, ¿qué
le respondiste? Acaba, cuéntamelo todo; no se te quede en el tintero una
mínima.

-Ella no me preguntó nada -dijo Sancho-, mas yo le dije de la manera que
vuestra merced, por su servicio, quedaba haciendo penitencia, desnudo de la
cintura arriba, metido entre estas sierras como si fuera salvaje, durmiendo
en el suelo, sin comer pan a manteles ni sin peinarse la barba, llorando y
maldiciendo su fortuna.

-En decir que maldecía mi fortuna dijiste mal -dijo don Quijote-, porque
antes la bendigo y bendeciré todos los días de mi vida, por haberme hecho
digno de merecer amar tan alta señora como Dulcinea del Toboso.

-Tan alta es -respondió Sancho-, que a buena fe que me lleva a mí más de un
coto.

-Pues, ¿cómo, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Haste medido tú con ella?
-Medíme en esta manera -respondió Sancho-: que, llegándole a ayudar a poner
un costal de trigo sobre un jumento, llegamos tan juntos que eché de ver
que me llevaba más de un gran palmo.

-Pues ¡es verdad -replicó don Quijote- que no acompaña esa grandeza y la
adorna con mil millones y gracias del alma! Pero no me negarás, Sancho, una
cosa: cuando llegaste junto a ella, ¿no sentiste un olor sabeo, una
fragancia aromática, y un no sé qué de bueno, que yo no acierto a dalle
nombre? Digo, ¿un tuho o tufo como si estuvieras en la tienda de algún
curioso guantero?

-Lo que sé decir -dijo Sancho- es que sentí un olorcillo algo hombruno; y
debía de ser que ella, con el mucho ejercicio, estaba sudada y algo
correosa.

-No sería eso -respondió don Quijote-, sino que tú debías de estar
romadizado, o te debiste de oler a ti mismo; porque yo sé bien a lo que
huele aquella rosa entre espinas, aquel lirio del campo, aquel ámbar
desleído.

-Todo puede ser -respondió Sancho-, que muchas veces sale de mí aquel olor
que entonces me pareció que salía de su merced de la señora Dulcinea; pero
no hay de qué maravillarse, que un diablo parece a otro.

-Y bien -prosiguió don Quijote-, he aquí que acabó de limpiar su trigo y de
enviallo al molino. ¿Qué hizo cuando leyó la carta?

-La carta -dijo Sancho- no la leyó, porque dijo que no sabía leer ni
escribir; antes, la rasgó y la hizo menudas piezas, diciendo que no la
quería dar a leer a nadie, porque no se supiesen en el lugar sus secretos,
y que bastaba lo que yo le había dicho de palabra acerca del amor que
vuestra merced le tenía y de la penitencia extraordinaria que por su causa
quedaba haciendo. Y, finalmente, me dijo que dijese a vuestra merced que le
besaba las manos, y que allí quedaba con más deseo de verle que de
escribirle; y que, así, le suplicaba y mandaba que, vista la presente,
saliese de aquellos matorrales y se dejase de hacer disparates, y se
pusiese luego luego en camino del Toboso, si otra cosa de más importancia
no le sucediese, porque tenía gran deseo de ver a vuestra merced. Rióse
mucho cuando le dije como se llamaba vuestra merced el Caballero de la
Triste Figura. Preguntéle si había ido allá el vizcaíno de marras; díjome
que sí, y que era un hombre muy de bien. También le pregunté por los
galeotes, mas díjome que no había visto hasta entonces alguno.

-Todo va bien hasta agora -dijo don Quijote-. Pero dime: ¿qué joya fue la
que te dio, al despedirte, por las nuevas que de mí le llevaste? Porque es
usada y antigua costumbre entre los caballeros y damas andantes dar a los
escuderos, doncellas o enanos que les llevan nuevas, de sus damas a ellos,
a ellas de sus andantes, alguna rica joya en albricias, en agradecimiento
de su recado.

-Bien puede eso ser así, y yo la tengo por buena usanza; pero eso debió de
ser en los tiempos pasados, que ahora sólo se debe de acostumbrar a dar un
pedazo de pan y queso, que esto fue lo que me dio mi señora Dulcinea, por
las bardas de un corral, cuando della me despedí; y aun, por más señas, era
el queso ovejuno.

-Es liberal en estremo -dijo don Quijote-, y si no te dio joya de oro, sin
duda debió de ser porque no la tendría allí a la mano para dártela; pero
buenas son mangas después de Pascua: yo la veré, y se satisfará todo.
¿Sabes de qué estoy maravillado, Sancho? De que me parece que fuiste y
veniste por los aires, pues poco más de tres días has tardado en ir y venir
desde aquí al Toboso, habiendo de aquí allá más de treinta leguas; por lo
cual me doy a entender que aquel sabio nigromante que tiene cuenta con mis
cosas y es mi amigo (porque por fuerza le hay, y le ha de haber, so pena
que yo no sería buen caballero andante); digo que este tal te debió de
ayudar a caminar, sin que tú lo sintieses; que hay sabio déstos que coge a
un caballero andante durmiendo en su cama, y, sin saber cómo o en qué
manera, amanece otro día más de mil leguas de donde anocheció. Y si no
fuese por esto, no se podrían socorrer en sus peligros los caballeros
andantes unos a otros, como se socorren a cada paso. Que acaece estar uno
peleando en las sierras de Armenia con algún endriago, o con algún fiero
vestiglo, o con otro caballero, donde lleva lo peor de la batalla y está ya
a punto de muerte, y cuando no os me cato, asoma por acullá, encima de una
nube, o sobre un carro de fuego, otro caballero amigo suyo, que poco antes
se hallaba en Ingalaterra, que le favorece y libra de la muerte, y a la
noche se halla en su posada, cenando muy a su sabor; y suele haber de la
una a la otra parte dos o tres mil leguas. Y todo esto se hace por
industria y sabiduría destos sabios encantadores que tienen cuidado destos
valerosos caballeros. Así que, amigo Sancho, no se me hace dificultoso
creer que en tan breve tiempo hayas ido y venido desde este lugar al del
Toboso, pues, como tengo dicho, algún sabio amigo te debió de llevar en
volandillas, sin que tú lo sintieses.

-Así sería -dijo Sancho-; porque a buena fe que andaba Rocinante como si
fuera asno de gitano con azogue en los oídos.

-Y ¡cómo si llevaba azogue! -dijo don Quijote-, y aun una legión de
demonios, que es gente que camina y hace caminar, sin cansarse, todo
aquello que se les antoja. Pero, dejando esto aparte, ¿qué te parece a ti
que debo yo de hacer ahora cerca de lo que mi señora me manda que la vaya a
ver?; que, aunque yo veo que estoy obligado a cumplir su mandamiento, véome
también imposibilitado del don que he prometido a la princesa que con
nosotros viene, y fuérzame la ley de caballería a cumplir mi palabra antes
que mi gusto. Por una parte, me acosa y fatiga el deseo de ver a mi señora;
por otra, me incita y llama la prometida fe y la gloria que he de alcanzar
en esta empresa. Pero lo que pienso hacer será caminar apriesa y llegar
presto donde está este gigante, y, en llegando, le cortaré la cabeza, y
pondré a la princesa pacíficamente en su estado, y al punto daré la vuelta
a ver a la luz que mis sentidos alumbra, a la cual daré tales disculpas que
ella venga a tener por buena mi tardanza, pues verá que todo redunda en
aumento de su gloria y fama, pues cuanta yo he alcanzado, alcanzo y
alcanzare por las armas en esta vida, toda me viene del favor que ella me
da y de ser yo suyo.

-¡Ay -dijo Sancho-, y cómo está vuestra merced lastimado de esos cascos!
Pues dígame, señor: ¿piensa vuestra merced caminar este camino en balde, y
dejar pasar y perder un tan rico y tan principal casamiento como éste,
donde le dan en dote un reino, que a buena verdad que he oído decir que
tiene más de veinte mil leguas de contorno, y que es abundantísimo de todas
las cosas que son necesarias para el sustento de la vida humana, y que es
mayor que Portugal y que Castilla juntos? Calle, por amor de Dios, y tenga
vergüenza de lo que ha dicho, y tome mi consejo, y perdóneme, y cásese
luego en el primer lugar que haya cura; y si no, ahí está nuestro
licenciado, que lo hará de perlas. Y advierta que ya tengo edad para dar
consejos, y que este que le doy le viene de molde, y que más vale pájaro en
mano que buitre volando, porque quien bien tiene y mal escoge, por bien que
se enoja no se venga.

-Mira, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-: si el consejo que me das de que me
case es porque sea luego rey, en matando al gigante, y tenga cómodo para
hacerte mercedes y darte lo prometido, hágote saber que sin casarme podré
cumplir tu deseo muy fácilmente, porque yo sacaré de adahala, antes de
entrar en la batalla, que, saliendo vencedor della, ya que no me case, me
han de dar una parte del reino, para que la pueda dar a quien yo quisiere;
y, en dándomela, ¿a quién quieres tú que la dé sino a ti?

-Eso está claro -respondió Sancho-, pero mire vuestra merced que la escoja
hacia la marina, porque, si no me contentare la vivienda, pueda embarcar
mis negros vasallos y hacer dellos lo que ya he dicho. Y vuestra merced no
se cure de ir por agora a ver a mi señora Dulcinea, sino váyase a matar al
gigante, y concluyamos este negocio; que por Dios que se me asienta que ha
de ser de mucha honra y de mucho provecho.

-Dígote, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que estás en lo cierto, y que habré de
tomar tu consejo en cuanto el ir antes con la princesa que a ver a
Dulcinea. Y avísote que no digas nada a nadie, ni a los que con nosotros
vienen, de lo que aquí hemos departido y tratado; que, pues Dulcinea es tan
recatada que no quiere que se sepan sus pensamientos, no será bien que yo,
ni otro por mí, los descubra.

-Pues si eso es así -dijo Sancho-, ¿cómo hace vuestra merced que todos los
que vence por su brazo se vayan a presentar ante mi señora Dulcinea, siendo
esto firma de su nombre que la quiere bien y que es su enamorado? Y, siendo
forzoso que los que fueren se han de ir a hincar de finojos ante su
presencia, y decir que van de parte de vuestra merced a dalle la
obediencia, ¿cómo se pueden encubrir los pensamientos de entrambos?
-¡Oh, qué necio y qué simple que eres! -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Tú no ves,
Sancho, que eso todo redunda en su mayor ensalzamiento? Porque has de saber
que en este nuestro estilo de caballería es gran honra tener una dama
muchos caballeros andantes que la sirvan, sin que se estiendan más sus
pensamientos que a servilla, por sólo ser ella quien es, sin esperar otro
premio de sus muchos y buenos deseos, sino que ella se contente de
acetarlos por sus caballeros.

-Con esa manera de amor -dijo Sancho- he oído yo predicar que se ha de amar
a Nuestro Señor, por sí solo, sin que nos mueva esperanza de gloria o temor
de pena. Aunque yo le querría amar y servir por lo que pudiese.
-¡Válate el diablo por villano -dijo don Quijote-, y qué de discreciones
dices a las veces! No parece sino que has estudiado.

-Pues a fe mía que no sé leer -respondió Sancho.

En esto, les dio voces maese Nicolás que esperasen un poco, que querían
detenerse a beber en una fontecilla que allí estaba. Detúvose don Quijote,
con no poco gusto de Sancho, que ya estaba cansado de mentir tanto y temía
no le cogiese su amo a palabras; porque, puesto que él sabía que Dulcinea
era una labradora del Toboso, no la había visto en toda su vida.
Habíase en este tiempo vestido Cardenio los vestidos que Dorotea traía
cuando la hallaron, que, aunque no eran muy buenos, hacían mucha ventaja a
los que dejaba. Apeáronse junto a la fuente, y con lo que el cura se
acomodó en la venta satisficieron, aunque poco, la mucha hambre que todos
traían.

Estando en esto, acertó a pasar por allí un muchacho que iba de camino, el
cual, poniéndose a mirar con mucha atención a los que en la fuente estaban,
de allí a poco arremetió a don Quijote, y, abrazándole por las piernas,
comenzó a llorar muy de propósito, diciendo:

-¡Ay, señor mío! ¿No me conoce vuestra merced? Pues míreme bien, que yo soy
aquel mozo Andrés que quitó vuestra merced de la encina donde estaba atado.
Reconocióle don Quijote, y, asiéndole por la mano, se volvió a los que allí
estaban y dijo:

-Porque vean vuestras mercedes cuán de importancia es haber caballeros
andantes en el mundo, que desfagan los tuertos y agravios que en él se
hacen por los insolentes y malos hombres que en él viven, sepan vuestras
mercedes que los días pasados, pasando yo por un bosque, oí unos gritos y
unas voces muy lastimosas, como de persona afligida y menesterosa; acudí
luego, llevado de mi obligación, hacia la parte donde me pareció que las
lamentables voces sonaban, y hallé atado a una encina a este muchacho que
ahora está delante (de lo que me huelgo en el alma, porque será testigo que
no me dejará mentir en nada); digo que estaba atado a la encina, desnudo
del medio cuerpo arriba, y estábale abriendo a azotes con las riendas de
una yegua un villano, que después supe que era amo suyo; y, así como yo le
vi, le pregunté la causa de tan atroz vapulamiento; respondió el zafio que
le azotaba porque era su criado, y que ciertos descuidos que tenía nacían
más de ladrón que de simple; a lo cual este niño dijo: ''Señor, no me azota
sino porque le pido mi salario''. El amo replicó no sé qué arengas y
disculpas, las cuales, aunque de mí fueron oídas, no fueron admitidas. En
resolución, yo le hice desatar, y tomé juramento al villano de que le
llevaría consigo y le pagaría un real sobre otro, y aun sahumados. ¿No es
verdad todo esto, hijo Andrés? ¿No notaste con cuánto imperio se lo mandé,
y con cuánta humildad prometió de hacer todo cuanto yo le impuse, y
notifiqué y quise? Responde; no te turbes ni dudes en nada: di lo que pasó
a estos señores, porque se vea y considere ser del provecho que digo haber
caballeros andantes por los caminos.

-Todo lo que vuestra merced ha dicho es mucha verdad -respondió el
muchacho-, pero el fin del negocio sucedió muy al revés de lo que vuestra
merced se imagina.

-¿Cómo al revés? -replicó don Quijote-; luego, ¿no te pagó el villano?
-No sólo no me pagó -respondió el muchacho-, pero, así como vuestra merced
traspuso del bosque y quedamos solos, me volvió a atar a la mesma encina, y
me dio de nuevo tantos azotes que quedé hecho un San Bartolomé desollado;
y, a cada azote que me daba, me decía un donaire y chufeta acerca de hacer
burla de vuestra merced, que, a no sentir yo tanto dolor, me riera de lo
que decía. En efeto: él me paró tal, que hasta ahora he estado curándome en
un hospital del mal que el mal villano entonces me hizo. De todo lo cual
tiene vuestra merced la culpa, porque si se fuera su camino adelante y no
viniera donde no le llamaban, ni se entremetiera en negocios ajenos, mi amo
se contentara con darme una o dos docenas de azotes, y luego me soltara y
pagara cuanto me debía. Mas, como vuestra merced le deshonró tan sin
propósito y le dijo tantas villanías, encendiósele la cólera, y, como no la
pudo vengar en vuestra merced, cuando se vio solo descargó sobre mí el
nublado, de modo que me parece que no seré más hombre en toda mi vida.
-El daño estuvo -dijo don Quijote- en irme yo de allí; que no me había de
ir hasta dejarte pagado, porque bien debía yo de saber, por luengas
experiencias, que no hay villano que guarde palabra que tiene, si él vee
que no le está bien guardalla. Pero ya te acuerdas, Andrés, que yo juré que
si no te pagaba, que había de ir a buscarle, y que le había de hallar,
aunque se escondiese en el vientre de la ballena.

-Así es la verdad -dijo Andrés-, pero no aprovechó nada.

-Ahora verás si aprovecha -dijo don Quijote.

Y, diciendo esto, se levantó muy apriesa y mandó a Sancho que enfrenase a
Rocinante, que estaba paciendo en tanto que ellos comían.

Preguntóle Dorotea qué era lo que hacer quería. Él le respondió que quería
ir a buscar al villano y castigalle de tan mal término, y hacer pagado a
Andrés hasta el último maravedí, a despecho y pesar de cuantos villanos
hubiese en el mundo. A lo que ella respondió que advirtiese que no podía,
conforme al don prometido, entremeterse en ninguna empresa hasta acabar la
suya; y que, pues esto sabía él mejor que otro alguno, que sosegase el
pecho hasta la vuelta de su reino.

-Así es verdad -respondió don Quijote-, y es forzoso que Andrés tenga
paciencia hasta la vuelta, como vos, señora, decís; que yo le torno a jurar
y a prometer de nuevo de no parar hasta hacerle vengado y pagado.

-No me creo desos juramentos -dijo Andrés-; más quisiera tener agora con
qué llegar a Sevilla que todas las venganzas del mundo: déme, si tiene ahí,
algo que coma y lleve, y quédese con Dios su merced y todos los caballeros
andantes; que tan bien andantes sean ellos para consigo como lo han sido
para conmigo.

Sacó de su repuesto Sancho un pedazo de pan y otro de queso, y, dándoselo
al mozo, le dijo:

-Tomá, hermano Andrés, que a todos nos alcanza parte de vuestra desgracia.
-Pues, ¿qué parte os alcanza a vos? -preguntó Andrés.

-Esta parte de queso y pan que os doy -respondió Sancho-, que Dios sabe si
me ha de hacer falta o no; porque os hago saber, amigo, que los escuderos
de los caballeros andantes estamos sujetos a mucha hambre y a mala ventura,
y aun a otras cosas que se sienten mejor que se dicen.

Andrés asió de su pan y queso, y, viendo que nadie le daba otra cosa, abajó
su cabeza y tomó el camino en las manos, como suele decirse. Bien es verdad
que, al partirse, dijo a don Quijote:

-Por amor de Dios, señor caballero andante, que si otra vez me encontrare,
aunque vea que me hacen pedazos, no me socorra ni ayude, sino déjeme con mi
desgracia; que no será tanta, que no sea mayor la que me vendrá de su ayuda
de vuestra merced, a quien Dios maldiga, y a todos cuantos caballeros
andantes han nacido en el mundo.

Íbase a levantar don Quijote para castigalle, mas él se puso a correr de
modo que ninguno se atrevió a seguille. Quedó corridísimo don Quijote del
cuento de Andrés, y fue menester que los demás tuviesen mucha cuenta con no
reírse, por no acaballe de correr del todo.





Capítulo XXXII. Que trata de lo que sucedió en la venta a toda la cuadrilla
de don Quijote


Acabóse la buena comida, ensillaron luego, y, sin que les sucediese cosa
digna de contar, llegaron otro día a la venta, espanto y asombro de Sancho
Panza; y, aunque él quisiera no entrar en ella, no lo pudo huir. La
ventera, ventero, su hija y Maritornes, que vieron venir a don Quijote y a
Sancho, les salieron a recebir con muestras de mucha alegría, y él las
recibió con grave continente y aplauso, y díjoles que le aderezasen otro
mejor lecho que la vez pasada; a lo cual le respondió la huéspeda que como
la pagase mejor que la otra vez, que ella se la daría de príncipes. Don
Quijote dijo que sí haría, y así, le aderezaron uno razonable en el mismo
caramanchón de marras, y él se acostó luego, porque venía muy quebrantado y
falto de juicio.

No se hubo bien encerrado, cuando la huéspeda arremetió al barbero, y,
asiéndole de la barba, dijo:

-Para mi santiguada, que no se ha aún de aprovechar más de mi rabo para su
barba, y que me ha de volver mi cola; que anda lo de mi marido por esos
suelos, que es vergüenza; digo, el peine, que solía yo colgar de mi buena
cola.

No se la quería dar el barbero, aunque ella más tiraba, hasta que el
licenciado le dijo que se la diese, que ya no era menester más usar de
aquella industria, sino que se descubriese y mostrase en su misma forma, y
dijese a don Quijote que cuando le despojaron los ladrones galeotes se
habían venido a aquella venta huyendo; y que si preguntase por el escudero
de la princesa, le dirían que ella le había enviado adelante a dar aviso a
los de su reino como ella iba y llevaba consigo el libertador de todos. Con
esto, dio de buena gana la cola a la ventera el barbero, y asimismo le
volvieron todos los adherentes que había prestado para la libertad de don
Quijote. Espantáronse todos los de la venta de la hermosura de Dorotea, y
aun del buen talle del zagal Cardenio. Hizo el cura que les aderezasen de
comer de lo que en la venta hubiese, y el huésped, con esperanza de mejor
paga, con diligencia les aderezó una razonable comida; y a todo esto dormía
don Quijote, y fueron de parecer de no despertalle, porque más provecho le
haría por entonces el dormir que el comer.

Trataron sobre comida, estando delante el ventero, su mujer, su hija,
Maritornes, todos los pasajeros, de la estraña locura de don Quijote y del
modo que le habían hallado. La huéspeda les contó lo que con él y con el
arriero les había acontecido, y, mirando si acaso estaba allí Sancho, como
no le viese, contó todo lo de su manteamiento, de que no poco gusto
recibieron. Y, como el cura dijese que los libros de caballerías que don
Quijote había leído le habían vuelto el juicio, dijo el ventero:

-No sé yo cómo puede ser eso; que en verdad que, a lo que yo entiendo, no
hay mejor letrado en el mundo, y que tengo ahí dos o tres dellos, con otros
papeles, que verdaderamente me han dado la vida, no sólo a mí, sino a otros
muchos. Porque, cuando es tiempo de la siega, se recogen aquí, las fiestas,
muchos segadores, y siempre hay algunos que saben leer, el cual coge uno
destos libros en las manos, y rodeámonos dél más de treinta, y estámosle
escuchando con tanto gusto que nos quita mil canas; a lo menos, de mí sé
decir que cuando oyo decir aquellos furibundos y terribles golpes que los
caballeros pegan, que me toma gana de hacer otro tanto, y que querría estar
oyéndolos noches y días.

-Y yo ni más ni menos -dijo la ventera-, porque nunca tengo buen rato en mi
casa sino aquel que vos estáis escuchando leer: que estáis tan embobado,
que no os acordáis de reñir por entonces.

-Así es la verdad -dijo Maritornes-, y a buena fe que yo también gusto
mucho de oír aquellas cosas, que son muy lindas; y más, cuando cuentan que
se está la otra señora debajo de unos naranjos abrazada con su caballero, y
que les está una dueña haciéndoles la guarda, muerta de envidia y con mucho
sobresalto. Digo que todo esto es cosa de mieles.

-Y a vos ¿qué os parece, señora doncella? -dijo el cura, hablando con la
hija del ventero.

-No sé, señor, en mi ánima -respondió ella-; también yo lo escucho, y en
verdad que, aunque no lo entiendo, que recibo gusto en oíllo; pero no gusto
yo de los golpes de que mi padre gusta, sino de las lamentaciones que los
caballeros hacen cuando están ausentes de sus señoras: que en verdad que
algunas veces me hacen llorar de compasión que les tengo.

-Luego, ¿bien las remediárades vos, señora doncella -dijo Dorotea-, si por
vos lloraran?

-No sé lo que me hiciera -respondió la moza-; sólo sé que hay algunas
señoras de aquéllas tan crueles, que las llaman sus caballeros tigres y
leones y otras mil inmundicias. Y, ¡Jesús!, yo no sé qué gente es aquélla
tan desalmada y tan sin conciencia, que por no mirar a un hombre honrado,
le dejan que se muera, o que se vuelva loco. Yo no sé para qué es tanto
melindre: si lo hacen de honradas, cásense con ellos, que ellos no desean
otra cosa.

-Calla, niña -dijo la ventera-, que parece que sabes mucho destas cosas, y
no está bien a las doncellas saber ni hablar tanto.

-Como me lo pregunta este señor -respondió ella-, no pude dejar de
respondelle.

-Ahora bien -dijo el cura-, traedme, señor huésped, aquesos libros, que los
quiero ver.

-Que me place -respondió él.

Y, entrando en su aposento, sacó dél una maletilla vieja, cerrada con una
cadenilla, y, abriéndola, halló en ella tres libros grandes y unos papeles
de muy buena letra, escritos de mano. El primer libro que abrió vio que era
Don Cirongilio de Tracia; y el otro, de Felixmarte de Hircania; y el otro,
la Historia del Gran Capitán Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, con la vida de
Diego García de Paredes. Así como el cura leyó los dos títulos primeros,
volvió el rostro al barbero y dijo:

-Falta nos hacen aquí ahora el ama de mi amigo y su sobrina.

-No hacen -respondió el barbero-, que también sé yo llevallos al corral o a
la chimenea; que en verdad que hay muy buen fuego en ella.

-Luego, ¿quiere vuestra merced quemar más libros? -dijo el ventero.
-No más -dijo el cura- que estos dos: el de Don Cirongilio y el de
Felixmarte.

-Pues, ¿por ventura -dijo el ventero- mis libros son herejes o flemáticos,
que los quiere quemar?

-Cismáticos queréis decir, amigo -dijo el barbero-, que no flemáticos.

-Así es -replicó el ventero-; mas si alguno quiere quemar, sea ese del Gran
Capitán y dese Diego García, que antes dejaré quemar un hijo que dejar
quemar ninguno desotros.

-Hermano mío -dijo el cura-, estos dos libros son mentirosos y están llenos
de disparates y devaneos; y este del Gran Capitán es historia verdadera, y
tiene los hechos de Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, el cual, por sus muchas y
grandes hazañas, mereció ser llamado de todo el mundo Gran Capitán,
renombre famoso y claro, y dél sólo merecido. Y este Diego García de
Paredes fue un principal caballero, natural de la ciudad de Trujillo, en
Estremadura, valentísimo soldado, y de tantas fuerzas naturales que detenía
con un dedo una rueda de molino en la mitad de su furia; y, puesto con un
montante en la entrada de una puente, detuvo a todo un innumerable
ejército, que no pasase por ella; y hizo otras tales cosas que, como si él
las cuenta y las escribe él asimismo, con la modestia de caballero y de
coronista propio, las escribiera otro, libre y desapasionado, pusieran en
su olvido las de los Hétores, Aquiles y Roldanes.

-¡Tomaos con mi padre! -dijo el dicho ventero-. ¡Mirad de qué se espanta:
de detener una rueda de molino! Por Dios, ahora había vuestra merced de
leer lo que hizo Felixmarte de Hircania, que de un revés solo partió cinco
gigantes por la cintura, como si fueran hechos de habas, como los
frailecicos que hacen los niños. Y otra vez arremetió con un grandísimo y
poderosísimo ejército, donde llevó más de un millón y seiscientos mil
soldados, todos armados desde el pie hasta la cabeza, y los desbarató a
todos, como si fueran manadas de ovejas. Pues, ¿qué me dirán del bueno de
don Cirongilio de Tracia, que fue tan valiente y animoso como se verá en el
libro, donde cuenta que, navegando por un río, le salió de la mitad del
agua una serpiente de fuego, y él, así como la vio, se arrojó sobre ella, y
se puso a horcajadas encima de sus escamosas espaldas, y le apretó con
ambas manos la garganta, con tanta fuerza que, viendo la serpiente que la
iba ahogando, no tuvo otro remedio sino dejarse ir a lo hondo del río,
llevándose tras sí al caballero, que nunca la quiso soltar? Y, cuando
llegaron allá bajo, se halló en unos palacios y en unos jardines tan lindos
que era maravilla; y luego la sierpe se volvió en un viejo anciano, que le
dijo tantas de cosas que no hay más que oír. Calle, señor, que si oyese
esto, se volvería loco de placer. ¡Dos higas para el Gran Capitán y para
ese Diego García que dice!

Oyendo esto Dorotea, dijo callando a Cardenio:

-Poco le falta a nuestro huésped para hacer la segunda parte de don
Quijote.

-Así me parece a mí -respondió Cardenio-, porque, según da indicio, él
tiene por cierto que todo lo que estos libros cuentan pasó ni más ni menos
que lo escriben, y no le harán creer otra cosa frailes descalzos.
-Mirad, hermano -tornó a decir el cura-, que no hubo en el mundo Felixmarte
de Hircania, ni don Cirongilio de Tracia, ni otros caballeros semejantes
que los libros de caballerías cuentan, porque todo es compostura y ficción
de ingenios ociosos, que los compusieron para el efeto que vos decís de
entretener el tiempo, como lo entretienen leyéndolos vuestros segadores;
porque realmente os juro que nunca tales caballeros fueron en el mundo, ni
tales hazañas ni disparates acontecieron en él.

-¡A otro perro con ese hueso! -respondió el ventero-. ¡Como si yo no
supiese cuántas son cinco y adónde me aprieta el zapato! No piense vuestra
merced darme papilla, porque por Dios que no soy nada blanco. ¡Bueno es que
quiera darme vuestra merced a entender que todo aquello que estos buenos
libros dicen sea disparates y mentiras, estando impreso con licencia de los
señores del Consejo Real, como si ellos fueran gente que habían de dejar
imprimir tanta mentira junta, y tantas batallas y tantos encantamentos que
quitan el juicio!

-Ya os he dicho, amigo -replicó el cura-, que esto se hace para entretener
nuestros ociosos pensamientos; y, así como se consiente en las repúblicas
bien concertadas que haya juegos de ajedrez, de pelota y de trucos, para
entretener a algunos que ni tienen, ni deben, ni pueden trabajar, así se
consiente imprimir y que haya tales libros, creyendo, como es verdad, que
no ha de haber alguno tan ignorante que tenga por historia verdadera
ninguna destos libros. Y si me fuera lícito agora, y el auditorio lo
requiriera, yo dijera cosas acerca de lo que han de tener los libros de
caballerías para ser buenos, que quizá fueran de provecho y aun de gusto
para algunos; pero yo espero que vendrá tiempo en que lo pueda comunicar
con quien pueda remediallo, y en este entretanto creed, señor ventero, lo
que os he dicho, y tomad vuestros libros, y allá os avenid con sus verdades
o mentiras, y buen provecho os hagan, y quiera Dios que no cojeéis del pie
que cojea vuestro huésped don Quijote.

-Eso no -respondió el ventero-, que no seré yo tan loco que me haga
caballero andante: que bien veo que ahora no se usa lo que se usaba en
aquel tiempo, cuando se dice que andaban por el mundo estos famosos
caballeros.

A la mitad desta plática se halló Sancho presente, y quedó muy confuso y
pensativo de lo que había oído decir que ahora no se usaban caballeros
andantes, y que todos los libros de caballerías eran necedades y mentiras,
y propuso en su corazón de esperar en lo que paraba aquel viaje de su amo,
y que si no salía con la felicidad que él pensaba, determinaba de dejalle y
volverse con su mujer y sus hijos a su acostumbrado trabajo.

Llevábase la maleta y los libros el ventero, mas el cura le dijo:
-Esperad, que quiero ver qué papeles son esos que de tan buena letra están
escritos.

Sacólos el huésped, y, dándoselos a leer, vio hasta obra de ocho pliegos
escritos de mano, y al principio tenían un título grande que decía: Novela
del curioso impertinente. Leyó el cura para sí tres o cuatro renglones y
dijo:

-Cierto que no me parece mal el título desta novela, y que me viene
voluntad de leella toda.

A lo que respondió el ventero:

-Pues bien puede leella su reverencia, porque le hago saber que algunos
huéspedes que aquí la han leído les ha contentado mucho, y me la han pedido
con muchas veras; mas yo no se la he querido dar, pensando volvérsela a
quien aquí dejó esta maleta olvidada con estos libros y esos papeles; que
bien puede ser que vuelva su dueño por aquí algún tiempo, y, aunque sé que
me han de hacer falta los libros, a fe que se los he de volver: que, aunque
ventero, todavía soy cristiano.

-Vos tenéis mucha razón, amigo -dijo el cura-, mas, con todo eso, si la
novela me contenta, me la habéis de dejar trasladar.

-De muy buena gana -respondió el ventero.

Mientras los dos esto decían, había tomado Cardenio la novela y comenzado a
leer en ella; y, pareciéndole lo mismo que al cura, le rogó que la leyese
de modo que todos la oyesen.

-Sí leyera -dijo el cura-, si no fuera mejor gastar este tiempo en dormir
que en leer.

-Harto reposo será para mí -dijo Dorotea- entretener el tiempo oyendo algún
cuento, pues aún no tengo el espíritu tan sosegado que me conceda dormir
cuando fuera razón.

-Pues desa manera -dijo el cura-, quiero leerla, por curiosidad siquiera;
quizá tendrá alguna de gusto.

Acudió maese Nicolás a rogarle lo mesmo, y Sancho también; lo cual visto
del cura, y entendiendo que a todos daría gusto y él le recibiría, dijo:
-Pues así es, esténme todos atentos, que la novela comienza desta manera:





Capítulo XXXIII. Donde se cuenta la novela del Curioso impertinente


«En Florencia, ciudad rica y famosa de Italia, en la provincia que llaman
Toscana, vivían Anselmo y Lotario, dos caballeros ricos y principales, y
tan amigos que, por excelencia y antonomasia, de todos los que los conocían
los dos amigos eran llamados. Eran solteros, mozos de una misma edad y de
unas mismas costumbres; todo lo cual era bastante causa a que los dos con
recíproca amistad se correspondiesen. Bien es verdad que el Anselmo era
algo más inclinado a los pasatiempos amorosos que el Lotario, al cual
llevaban tras sí los de la caza; pero, cuando se ofrecía, dejaba Anselmo de
acudir a sus gustos por seguir los de Lotario, y Lotario dejaba los suyos
por acudir a los de Anselmo; y, desta manera, andaban tan a una sus
voluntades, que no había concertado reloj que así lo anduviese.
»Andaba Anselmo perdido de amores de una doncella principal y hermosa de la
misma ciudad, hija de tan buenos padres y tan buena ella por sí, que se
determinó, con el parecer de su amigo Lotario, sin el cual ninguna cosa
hacía, de pedilla por esposa a sus padres, y así lo puso en ejecución; y el
que llevó la embajada fue Lotario, y el que concluyó el negocio tan a gusto
de su amigo, que en breve tiempo se vio puesto en la posesión que deseaba,
y Camila tan contenta de haber alcanzado a Anselmo por esposo, que no
cesaba de dar gracias al cielo, y a Lotario, por cuyo medio tanto bien le
había venido.

»Los primeros días, como todos los de boda suelen ser alegres, continuó
Lotario, como solía, la casa de su amigo Anselmo, procurando honralle,
festejalle y regocijalle con todo aquello que a él le fue posible; pero,
acabadas las bodas y sosegada ya la frecuencia de las visitas y parabienes,
comenzó Lotario a descuidarse con cuidado de las idas en casa de Anselmo,
por parecerle a él -como es razón que parezca a todos los que fueren
discretos- que no se han de visitar ni continuar las casas de los amigos
casados de la misma manera que cuando eran solteros; porque, aunque la
buena y verdadera amistad no puede ni debe de ser sospechosa en nada, con
todo esto, es tan delicada la honra del casado, que parece que se puede
ofender aun de los mesmos hermanos, cuanto más de los amigos.

»Notó Anselmo la remisión de Lotario, y formó dél quejas grandes,
diciéndole que si él supiera que el casarse había de ser parte para no
comunicalle como solía, que jamás lo hubiera hecho, y que si, por la buena
correspondencia que los dos tenían mientras él fue soltero, habían
alcanzado tan dulce nombre como el de ser llamados los dos amigos, que no
permitiese, por querer hacer del circunspecto, sin otra ocasión alguna,
que tan famoso y tan agradable nombre se perdiese; y que así, le suplicaba,
si era lícito que tal término de hablar se usase entre ellos, que volviese
a ser señor de su casa, y a entrar y salir en ella como de antes,
asegurándole que su esposa Camila no tenía otro gusto ni otra voluntad que
la que él quería que tuviese, y que, por haber sabido ella con cuántas
veras los dos se amaban, estaba confusa de ver en él tanta esquiveza.
»A todas estas y otras muchas razones que Anselmo dijo a Lotario para
persuadille volviese como solía a su casa, respondió Lotario con tanta
prudencia, discreción y aviso, que Anselmo quedó satisfecho de la buena
intención de su amigo, y quedaron de concierto que dos días en la semana y
las fiestas fuese Lotario a comer con él; y, aunque esto quedó así
concertado entre los dos, propuso Lotario de no hacer más de aquello que
viese que más convenía a la honra de su amigo, cuyo crédito estimaba en
más que el suyo proprio. Decía él, y decía bien, que el casado a quien el
cielo había concedido mujer hermosa, tanto cuidado había de tener qué
amigos llevaba a su casa como en mirar con qué amigas su mujer conversaba,
porque lo que no se hace ni concierta en las plazas, ni en los templos, ni
en las fiestas públicas, ni estaciones -cosas que no todas veces las han de
negar los maridos a sus mujeres-, se concierta y facilita en casa de la
amiga o la parienta de quien más satisfación se tiene.

»También decía Lotario que tenían necesidad los casados de tener cada uno
algún amigo que le advirtiese de los descuidos que en su proceder hiciese,
porque suele acontecer que con el mucho amor que el marido a la mujer
tiene, o no le advierte o no le dice, por no enojalla, que haga o deje de
hacer algunas cosas, que el hacellas o no, le sería de honra o de
vituperio; de lo cual, siendo del amigo advertido, fácilmente pondría
remedio en todo. Pero, ¿dónde se hallará amigo tan discreto y tan leal y
verdadero como aquí Lotario le pide? No lo sé yo, por cierto; sólo Lotario
era éste, que con toda solicitud y advertimiento miraba por la honra de su
amigo y procuraba dezmar, frisar y acortar los días del concierto del ir a
su casa, porque no pareciese mal al vulgo ocioso y a los ojos vagabundos y
maliciosos la entrada de un mozo rico, gentilhombre y bien nacido, y de las
buenas partes que él pensaba que tenía, en la casa de una mujer tan hermosa
como Camila; que, puesto que su bondad y valor podía poner freno a toda
maldiciente lengua, todavía no quería poner en duda su crédito ni el de su
amigo, y por esto los más de los días del concierto los ocupaba y
entretenía en otras cosas, que él daba a entender ser inexcusables. Así
que, en quejas del uno y disculpas del otro se pasaban muchos ratos y
partes del día.

»Sucedió, pues, que uno que los dos se andaban paseando por un prado fuera
de la ciudad, Anselmo dijo a Lotario las semejantes razones:
»-Pensabas, amigo Lotario, que a las mercedes que Dios me ha hecho en
hacerme hijo de tales padres como fueron los míos y al darme, no con mano
escasa, los bienes, así los que llaman de naturaleza como los de fortuna,
no puedo yo corresponder con agradecimiento que llegue al bien recebido, y
sobre al que me hizo en darme a ti por amigo y a Camila por mujer propria:
dos prendas que las estimo, si no en el grado que debo, en el que puedo.
Pues con todas estas partes, que suelen ser el todo con que los hombres
suelen y pueden vivir contentos, vivo yo el más despechado y el más
desabrido hombre de todo el universo mundo; porque no sé qué días a esta
parte me fatiga y aprieta un deseo tan estraño, y tan fuera del uso común
de otros, que yo me maravillo de mí mismo, y me culpo y me riño a solas, y
procuro callarlo y encubrirlo de mis proprios pensamientos; y así me ha
sido posible salir con este secreto como si de industria procurara decillo
a todo el mundo. Y, pues que, en efeto, él ha de salir a plaza,quiero que
sea en la del archivo de tu secreto, confiado que, con él y con la
diligencia que pondrás, como mi amigo verdadero, en remediarme, yo me veré
presto libre de la angustia que me causa, y llegará mi alegría por tu
solicitud al grado que ha llegado mi descontento por mi locura.
»Suspenso tenían a Lotario las razones de Anselmo, y no sabía en qué había
de parar tan larga prevención o preámbulo; y, aunque iba revolviendo en su
imaginación qué deseo podría ser aquel que a su amigo tanto fatigaba, dio
siempre muy lejos del blanco de la verdad; y, por salir presto de la agonía
que le causaba aquella suspensión, le dijo que hacía notorio agravio a su
mucha amistad en andar buscando rodeos para decirle sus más encubiertos
pensamientos, pues tenía cierto que se podía prometer dél, o ya consejos
para entretenellos, o ya remedio para cumplillos.

»-Así es la verdad -respondió Anselmo-, y con esa confianza te hago saber,
amigo Lotario, que el deseo que me fatiga es pensar si Camila, mi esposa,
es tan buena y tan perfeta como yo pienso; y no puedo enterarme en esta
verdad, si no es probándola de manera que la prueba manifieste los quilates
de su bondad, como el fuego muestra los del oro. Porque yo tengo para mí,
¡oh amigo!, que no es una mujer más buena de cuanto es o no es solicitada,
y que aquella sola es fuerte que no se dobla a las promesas, a las dádivas,
a las lágrimas y a las continuas importunidades de los solícitos amantes.
Porque, ¿qué hay que agradecer -decía él- que una mujer sea buena, si nadie
le dice que sea mala? ¿Qué mucho que esté recogida y temerosa la que no le
dan ocasión para que se suelte, y la que sabe que tiene marido que, en
cogiéndola en la primera desenvoltura, la ha de quitar la vida? Ansí que,
la que es buena por temor, o por falta de lugar, yo no la quiero tener en
aquella estima en que tendré a la solicitada y perseguida que salió con la
corona del vencimiento. De modo que, por estas razones y por otras muchas
que te pudiera decir para acreditar y fortalecer la opinión que tengo,
deseo que Camila, mi esposa, pase por estas dificultades y se acrisole y
quilate en el fuego de verse requerida y solicitada, y de quien tenga valor
para poner en ella sus deseos; y si ella sale, como creo que saldrá, con la
palma desta batalla, tendré yo por sin igual mi ventura; podré yo decir que
está colmo el vacío de mis deseos; diré que me cupo en suerte la mujer
fuerte, de quien el Sabio dice que ¿quién la hallará? Y, cuando esto suceda
al revés de lo que pienso, con el gusto de ver que acerté en mi opinión,
llevaré sin pena la que de razón podrá causarme mi tan costosa experiencia.
Y, prosupuesto que ninguna cosa de cuantas me dijeres en contra de mi deseo
ha de ser de algún provecho para dejar de ponerle por la obra, quiero, ¡oh
amigo Lotario!, que te dispongas a ser el instrumento que labre aquesta
obra de mi gusto; que yo te daré lugar para que lo hagas, sin faltarte todo
aquello que yo viere ser necesario para solicitar a una mujer honesta,
honrada, recogida y desinteresada. Y muéveme, entre otras cosas, a fiar de
ti esta tan ardua empresa, el ver que si de ti es vencida Camila, no ha de
llegar el vencimiento a todo trance y rigor, sino a sólo a tener por hecho
lo que se ha de hacer, por buen respeto; y así, no quedaré yo ofendido más
de con el deseo, y mi injuria quedará escondida en la virtud de tu
silencio, que bien sé que en lo que me tocare ha de ser eterno como el de
la muerte. Así que, si quieres que yo tenga vida que pueda decir que lo es,
desde luego has de entrar en esta amorosa batalla, no tibia ni
perezosamente, sino con el ahínco y diligencia que mi deseo pide, y con la
confianza que nuestra amistad me asegura.

»Éstas fueron las razones que Anselmo dijo a Lotario, a todas las cuales
estuvo tan atento, que si no fueron las que quedan escritas que le dijo, no
desplegó sus labios hasta que hubo acabado; y, viendo que no decía más,
después que le estuvo mirando un buen espacio, como si mirara otra cosa que
jamás hubiera visto, que le causara admiración y espanto, le dijo:
»-No me puedo persuadir, ¡oh amigo Anselmo!, a que no sean burlas las cosas
que me has dicho; que, a pensar que de veras las decías, no consintiera que
tan adelante pasaras, porque con no escucharte previniera tu larga arenga.
Sin duda imagino, o que no me conoces, o que yo no te conozco. Pero no; que
bien sé que eres Anselmo, y tú sabes que yo soy Lotario; el daño está en
que yo pienso que no eres el Anselmo que solías, y tú debes de haber
pensado que tampoco yo soy el Lotario que debía ser, porque las cosas que
me has dicho, ni son de aquel Anselmo mi amigo, ni las que me pides se han
de pedir a aquel Lotario que tú conoces; porque los buenos amigos han de
probar a sus amigos y valerse dellos, como dijo un poeta, usque ad aras;
que quiso decir que no se habían de valer de su amistad en cosas que fuesen
contra Dios. Pues, si esto sintió un gentil de la amistad, ¿cuánto mejor es
que lo sienta el cristiano, que sabe que por ninguna humana ha de perder la
amistad divina? Y cuando el amigo tirase tanto la barra que pusiese aparte
los respetos del cielo por acudir a los de su amigo, no ha de ser por cosas
ligeras y de poco momento, sino por aquellas en que vaya la honra y la vida
de su amigo. Pues dime tú ahora, Anselmo: ¿cuál destas dos cosas tienes en
peligro para que yo me aventure a complacerte y a hacer una cosa tan
detestable como me pides? Ninguna, por cierto; antes, me pides, según yo
entiendo, que procure y solicite quitarte la honra y la vida, y quitármela
a mí juntamente. Porque si yo he de procurar quitarte la honra, claro está
que te quito la vida, pues el hombre sin honra peor es que un muerto; y,
siendo yo el instrumento, como tú quieres que lo sea, de tanto mal tuyo,
¿no vengo a quedar deshonrado, y, por el mesmo consiguiente, sin vida?
Escucha, amigo Anselmo, y ten paciencia de no responderme hasta que acabe
de decirte lo que se me ofreciere acerca de lo que te ha pedido tu deseo;
que tiempo quedará para que tú me repliques y yo te escuche.

»-Que me place -dijo Anselmo-: di lo que quisieres.

»Y Lotario prosiguió diciendo:

»-Paréceme, ¡oh Anselmo!, que tienes tú ahora el ingenio como el que
siempre tienen los moros, a los cuales no se les puede dar a entender el
error de su secta con las acotaciones de la Santa Escritura, ni con razones
que consistan en especulación del entendimiento, ni que vayan fundadas en
artículos de fe, sino que les han de traer ejemplos palpables, fáciles,
intelegibles, demonstrativos, indubitables, con demostraciones matemáticas
que no se pueden negar, como cuando dicen: "Si de dos partes iguales
quitamos partes iguales, las que quedan también son iguales"; y, cuando
esto no entiendan de palabra, como, en efeto, no lo entienden, háseles de
mostrar con las manos y ponérselo delante de los ojos, y, aun con todo
esto, no basta nadie con ellos a persuadirles las verdades de mi sacra
religión. Y este mesmo término y modo me convendrá usar contigo, porque el
deseo que en ti ha nacido va tan descaminado y tan fuera de todo aquello
que tenga sombra de razonable, que me parece que ha de ser tiempo gastado
el que ocupare en darte a entender tu simplicidad, que por ahora no le
quiero dar otro nombre, y aun estoy por dejarte en tu desatino, en pena de
tu mal deseo; mas no me deja usar deste rigor la amistad que te tengo, la
cual no consiente que te deje puesto en tan manifiesto peligro de perderte.
Y, porque claro lo veas, dime, Anselmo: ¿tú no me has dicho que tengo de
solicitar a una retirada, persuadir a una honesta, ofrecer a una
desinteresada, servir a una prudente? Sí que me lo has dicho. Pues si tú
sabes que tienes mujer retirada, honesta, desinteresada y prudente, ¿qué
buscas? Y si piensas que de todos mis asaltos ha de salir vencedora, como
saldrá sin duda, ¿qué mejores títulos piensas darle después que los que
ahora tiene, o qué será más después de lo que es ahora? O es que tú no la
tienes por la que dices, o tú no sabes lo que pides. Si no la tienes por lo
que dices, ¿para qué quieres probarla, sino, como a mala, hacer della lo
que más te viniere en gusto? Mas si es tan buena como crees, impertinente
cosa será hacer experiencia de la mesma verdad, pues, después de hecha, se
ha de quedar con la estimación que primero tenía. Así que, es razón
concluyente que el intentar las cosas de las cuales antes nos puede suceder
daño que provecho es de juicios sin discurso y temerarios, y más cuando
quieren intentar aquellas a que no son forzados ni compelidos, y que de muy
lejos traen descubierto que el intentarlas es manifiesta locura. Las cosas
dificultosas se intentan por Dios, o por el mundo, o por entrambos a dos:
las que se acometen por Dios son las que acometieron los santos,
acometiendo a vivir vida de ángeles en cuerpos humanos; las que se acometen
por respeto del mundo son las de aquellos que pasan tanta infinidad de
agua, tanta diversidad de climas, tanta estrañeza de gentes, por adquirir
estos que llaman bienes de fortuna. Y las que se intentan por Dios y por el
mundo juntamente son aquellas de los valerosos soldados, que apenas veen en
el contrario muro abierto tanto espacio cuanto es el que pudo hacer una
redonda bala de artillería, cuando, puesto aparte todo temor, sin hacer
discurso ni advertir al manifiesto peligro que les amenaza, llevados en
vuelo de las alas del deseo de volver por su fe, por su nación y por su
rey, se arrojan intrépidamente por la mitad de mil contrapuestas muertes
que los esperan. Estas cosas son las que suelen intentarse, y es honra,
gloria y provecho intentarlas, aunque tan llenas de inconvenientes y
peligros. Pero la que tú dices que quieres intentar y poner por obra, ni te
ha de alcanzar gloria de Dios, bienes de la fortuna, ni fama con los
hombres; porque, puesto que salgas con ella como deseas, no has de quedar
ni más ufano, ni más rico, ni más honrado que estás ahora; y si no sales,
te has de ver en la mayor miseria que imaginarse pueda, porque no te ha de
aprovechar pensar entonces que no sabe nadie la desgracia que te ha
sucedido, porque bastará para afligirte y deshacerte que la sepas tú mesmo.
Y, para confirmación desta verdad, te quiero decir una estancia que hizo el
famoso poeta Luis Tansilo, en el fin de su primera parte de Las lágrimas de
San Pedro, que dice así:

   Crece el dolor y crece la vergüenza
   en Pedro, cuando el día se ha mostrado;
   y, aunque allí no ve a nadie, se avergüenza
   de sí mesmo, por ver que había pecado:
   que a un magnánimo pecho a haber vergüenza
   no sólo ha de moverle el ser mirado;
   que de sí se avergüenza cuando yerra,
   si bien otro no vee que cielo y tierra.

Así que, no escusarás con el secreto tu dolor; antes, tendrás que llorar
contino, si no lágrimas de los ojos, lágrimas de sangre del corazón, como
las lloraba aquel simple doctor que nuestro poeta nos cuenta que hizo la
prueba del vaso, que, con mejor discurso, se escusó de hacerla el prudente
Reinaldos; que, puesto que aquello sea ficción poética, tiene en sí
encerrados secretos morales dignos de ser advertidos y entendidos e
imitados. Cuanto más que, con lo que ahora pienso decirte, acabarás de
venir en conocimiento del grande error que quieres cometer. Dime, Anselmo,
si el cielo, o la suerte buena, te hubiera hecho señor y legítimo posesor
de un finísimo diamante, de cuya bondad y quilates estuviesen satisfechos
cuantos lapidarios le viesen, y que todos a una voz y de común parecer
dijesen que llegaba en quilates, bondad y fineza a cuanto se podía estender
la naturaleza de tal piedra, y tú mesmo lo creyeses así, sin saber otra
cosa en contrario, ¿sería justo que te viniese en deseo de tomar aquel
diamante, y ponerle entre un ayunque y un martillo, y allí, a pura fuerza
de golpes y brazos, probar si es tan duro y tan fino como dicen? Y más, si
lo pusieses por obra; que, puesto caso que la piedra hiciese resistencia a
tan necia prueba, no por eso se le añadiría más valor ni más fama; y si se
rompiese, cosa que podría ser, ¿no se perdería todo? Sí, por cierto,
dejando a su dueño en estimación de que todos le tengan por simple. Pues
haz cuenta, Anselmo amigo, que Camila es fínisimo diamante, así en tu
estimación como en la ajena, y que no es razón ponerla en contingencia de
que se quiebre, pues, aunque se quede con su entereza, no puede subir a más
valor del que ahora tiene; y si faltase y no resistiese, considera desde
ahora cuál quedarías sin ella, y con cuánta razón te podrías quejar de ti
mesmo, por haber sido causa de su perdición y la tuya. Mira que no hay joya
en el mundo que tanto valga como la mujer casta y honrada, y que todo el
honor de las mujeres consiste en la opinión buena que dellas se tiene; y,
pues la de tu esposa es tal que llega al estremo de bondad que sabes, ¿para
qué quieres poner esta verdad en duda? Mira, amigo, que la mujer es animal
imperfecto, y que no se le han de poner embarazos donde tropiece y caiga,
sino quitárselos y despejalle el camino de cualquier inconveniente, para
que sin pesadumbre corra ligera a alcanzar la perfeción que le falta, que
consiste en el ser virtuosa. Cuentan los naturales que el arminio es un
animalejo que tiene una piel blanquísima, y que cuando quieren cazarle, los
cazadores usan deste artificio: que, sabiendo las partes por donde suele
pasar y acudir, las atajan con lodo, y después, ojeándole, le encaminan
hacia aquel lugar, y así como el arminio llega al lodo, se está quedo y se
deja prender y cautivar, a trueco de no pasar por el cieno y perder y
ensuciar su blancura, que la estima en más que la libertad y la vida. La
honesta y casta mujer es arminio, y es más que nieve blanca y limpia la
virtud de la honestidad; y el que quisiere que no la pierda, antes la
guarde y conserve, ha de usar de otro estilo diferente que con el arminio
se tiene, porque no le han de poner delante el cieno de los regalos y
servicios de los importunos amantes, porque quizá, y aun sin quizá, no
tiene tanta virtud y fuerza natural que pueda por sí mesma atropellar y
pasar por aquellos embarazos, y es necesario quitárselos y ponerle delante
la limpieza de la virtud y la belleza que encierra en sí la buena fama. Es
asimesmo la buena mujer como espejo de cristal luciente y claro; pero está
sujeto a empañarse y escurecerse con cualquiera aliento que le toque. Hase
de usar con la honesta mujer el estilo que con las reliquias: adorarlas y
no tocarlas. Hase de guardar y estimar la mujer buena como se guarda y
estima un hermoso jardín que está lleno de flores y rosas, cuyo dueño no
consiente que nadie le pasee ni manosee; basta que desde lejos, y por entre
las verjas de hierro, gocen de su fragrancia y hermosura. Finalmente,
quiero decirte unos versos que se me han venido a la memoria, que los oí en
una comedia moderna, que me parece que hacen al propósito de lo que vamos
tratando. Aconsejaba un prudente viejo a otro, padre de una doncella, que
la recogiese, guardase y encerrase, y entre otras razones, le dijo éstas:

   Es de vidrio la mujer;
   pero no se ha de probar
   si se puede o no quebrar,
   porque todo podría ser.
   Y es más fácil el quebrarse,
   y no es cordura ponerse
   a peligro de romperse
   lo que no puede soldarse.
   Y en esta opinión estén
   todos, y en razón la fundo:
   que si hay Dánaes en el mundo,
   hay pluvias de oro también.

Cuanto hasta aquí te he dicho, ¡oh Anselmo!, ha sido por lo que a ti te
toca; y ahora es bien que se oiga algo de lo que a mí me conviene; y si
fuere largo, perdóname, que todo lo requiere el laberinto donde te has
entrado y de donde quieres que yo te saque. Tú me tienes por amigo y
quieres quitarme la honra, cosa que es contra toda amistad; y aun no sólo
pretendes esto, sino que procuras que yo te la quite a ti. Que me la
quieres quitar a mí está claro, pues, cuando Camila vea que yo la solicito,
como me pides, cierto está que me ha de tener por hombre sin honra y mal
mirado, pues intento y hago una cosa tan fuera de aquello que el ser quien
soy y tu amistad me obliga. De que quieres que te la quite a ti no hay
duda, porque, viendo Camila que yo la solicito, ha de pensar que yo he
visto en ella alguna liviandad que me dio atrevimiento a descubrirle mi mal
deseo; y, teniéndose por deshonrada, te toca a ti, como a cosa suya, su
mesma deshonra. Y de aquí nace lo que comúnmente se platica: que el marido
de la mujer adúltera, puesto que él no lo sepa ni haya dado ocasión para
que su mujer no sea la que debe, ni haya sido en su mano, ni en su descuido
y poco recato estorbar su desgracia, con todo, le llaman y le nombran con
nombre de vituperio y bajo; y en cierta manera le miran, los que la maldad
de su mujer saben, con ojos de menosprecio, en cambio de mirarle con los de
lástima, viendo que no por su culpa, sino por el gusto de su mala
compañera, está en aquella desventura. Pero quiérote decir la causa por que
con justa razón es deshonrado el marido de la mujer mala, aunque él no sepa
que lo es, ni tenga culpa, ni haya sido parte, ni dado ocasión, para que
ella lo sea. Y no te canses de oírme, que todo ha de redundar en tu
provecho. Cuando Dios crió a nuestro primero padre en el Paraíso terrenal,
dice la Divina Escritura que infundió Dios sueño en Adán, y que, estando
durmiendo, le sacó una costilla del lado siniestro, de la cual formó a
nuestra madre Eva; y, así como Adán despertó y la miró, dijo: ''Ésta es
carne de mi carne y hueso de mis huesos''. Y Dios dijo: ''Por ésta dejará
el hombre a su padre y madre, y serán dos en una carne misma''. Y entonces
fue instituido el divino sacramento del matrimonio, con tales lazos que
sola la muerte puede desatarlos. Y tiene tanta fuerza y virtud este
milagroso sacramento, que hace que dos diferentes personas sean una mesma
carne; y aún hace más en los buenos casados, que, aunque tienen dos almas,
no tienen más de una voluntad. Y de aquí viene que, como la carne de la
esposa sea una mesma con la del esposo, las manchas que en ella caen, o los
defectos que se procura, redundan en la carne del marido, aunque él no haya
dado, como queda dicho, ocasión para aquel daño. Porque, así como el dolor
del pie o de cualquier miembro del cuerpo humano le siente todo el cuerpo,
por ser todo de una carne mesma, y la cabeza siente el daño del tobillo,
sin que ella se le haya causado, así el marido es participante de la
deshonra de la mujer, por ser una mesma cosa con ella. Y como las honras y
deshonras del mundo sean todas y nazcan de carne y sangre, y las de la
mujer mala sean deste género, es forzoso que al marido le quepa parte
dellas, y sea tenido por deshonrado sin que él lo sepa. Mira, pues, ¡oh
Anselmo!, al peligro que te pones en querer turbar el sosiego en que tu
buena esposa vive. Mira por cuán vana e impertinente curiosidad quieres
revolver los humores que ahora están sosegados en el pecho de tu casta
esposa. Advierte que lo que aventuras a ganar es poco, y que lo que
perderás será tanto que lo dejaré en su punto, porque me faltan palabras
para encarecerlo. Pero si todo cuanto he dicho no basta a moverte de tu mal
propósito, bien puedes buscar otro instrumento de tu deshonra y desventura,
que yo no pienso serlo, aunque por ello pierda tu amistad, que es la mayor
pérdida que imaginar puedo.

»Calló, en diciendo esto, el virtuoso y prudente Lotario, y Anselmo quedó
tan confuso y pensativo que por un buen espacio no le pudo responder
palabra; pero, en fin, le dijo:

»-Con la atención que has visto he escuchado, Lotario amigo, cuanto has
querido decirme, y en tus razones, ejemplos y comparaciones he visto la
mucha discreción que tienes y el estremo de la verdadera amistad que
alcanzas; y ansimesmo veo y confieso que si no sigo tu parecer y me voy
tras el mío, voy huyendo del bien y corriendo tras el mal. Prosupuesto
esto, has de considerar que yo padezco ahora la enfermedad que suelen tener
algunas mujeres, que se les antoja comer tierra, yeso, carbón y otras cosas
peores, aun asquerosas para mirarse, cuanto más para comerse; así que, es
menester usar de algún artificio para que yo sane, y esto se podía hacer
con facilidad, sólo con que comiences, aunque tibia y fingidamente, a
solicitar a Camila, la cual no ha de ser tan tierna que a los primeros
encuentros dé con su honestidad por tierra; y con solo este principio
quedaré contento y tú habrás cumplido con lo que debes a nuestra amistad,
no solamente dándome la vida, sino persuadiéndome de no verme sin honra. Y
estás obligado a hacer esto por una razón sola; y es que, estando yo, como
estoy, determinado de poner en plática esta prueba, no has tú de consentir
que yo dé cuenta de mi desatino a otra persona, con que pondría en aventura
el honor que tú procuras que no pierda; y, cuando el tuyo no esté en el
punto que debe en la intención de Camila en tanto que la solicitares,
importa poco o nada, pues con brevedad, viendo en ella la entereza que
esperamos, le podrás decir la pura verdad de nuestro artificio, con que
volverá tu crédito al ser primero. Y, pues tan poco aventuras y tanto
contento me puedes dar aventurándote, no lo dejes de hacer, aunque más
inconvenientes se te pongan delante, pues, como ya he dicho, con sólo que
comiences daré por concluida la causa.

»Viendo Lotario la resoluta voluntad de Anselmo, y no sabiendo qué más
ejemplos traerle ni qué más razones mostrarle para que no la siguiese, y
viendo que le amenazaba que daría a otro cuenta de su mal deseo, por evitar
mayor mal, determinó de contentarle y hacer lo que le pedía, con propósito
e intención de guiar aquel negocio de modo que, sin alterar los
pensamientos de Camila, quedase Anselmo satisfecho; y así, le respondió que
no comunicase su pensamiento con otro alguno, que él tomaba a su cargo
aquella empresa, la cual comenzaría cuando a él le diese más gusto.
Abrazóle Anselmo tierna y amorosamente, y agradecióle su ofrecimiento, como
si alguna grande merced le hubiera hecho; y quedaron de acuerdo entre los
dos que desde otro día siguiente se comenzase la obra; que él le daría
lugar y tiempo como a sus solas pudiese hablar a Camila, y asimesmo le
daría dineros y joyas que darla y que ofrecerla. Aconsejóle que le diese
músicas, que escribiese versos en su alabanza, y que, cuando él no quisiese
tomar trabajo de hacerlos, él mesmo los haría. A todo se ofreció Lotario,
bien con diferente intención que Anselmo pensaba.

»Y con este acuerdo se volvieron a casa de Anselmo, donde hallaron a Camila
con ansia y cuidado, esperando a su esposo, porque aquel día tardaba en
venir más de lo acostumbrado.

»Fuese Lotario a su casa, y Anselmo quedó en la suya, tan contento como
Lotario fue pensativo, no sabiendo qué traza dar para salir bien de aquel
impertinente negocio. Pero aquella noche pensó el modo que tendría para
engañar a Anselmo, sin ofender a Camila; y otro día vino a comer con su
amigo, y fue bien recebido de Camila, la cual le recebía y regalaba con
mucha voluntad, por entender la buena que su esposo le tenía.
»Acabaron de comer, levantaron los manteles y Anselmo dijo a Lotario que se
quedase allí con Camila, en tanto que él iba a un negocio forzoso, que
dentro de hora y media volvería. Rogóle Camila que no se fuese y Lotario se
ofreció a hacerle compañía, más nada aprovechó con Anselmo; antes,
importunó a Lotario que se quedase y le aguardase, porque tenía que tratar
con él una cosa de mucha importancia. Dijo también a Camila que no dejase
solo a Lotario en tanto que él volviese. En efeto, él supo tan bien fingir
la necesidad, o necedad, de su ausencia, que nadie pudiera entender que era
fingida. Fuese Anselmo, y quedaron solos a la mesa Camila y Lotario, porque
la demás gente de casa toda se había ido a comer. Viose Lotario puesto en
la estacada que su amigo deseaba y con el enemigo delante, que pudiera
vencer con sola su hermosura a un escuadrón de caballeros armados: mirad si
era razón que le temiera Lotario.

»Pero lo que hizo fue poner el codo sobre el brazo de la silla y la mano
abierta en la mejilla, y, pidiendo perdón a Camila del mal comedimiento,
dijo que quería reposar un poco en tanto que Anselmo volvía. Camila le
respondió que mejor reposaría en el estrado que en la silla, y así, le rogó
se entrase a dormir en él. No quiso Lotario, y allí se quedó dormido hasta
que volvió Anselmo, el cual, como halló a Camila en su aposento y a Lotario
durmiendo, creyó que, como se había tardado tanto, ya habrían tenido los
dos lugar para hablar, y aun para dormir, y no vio la hora en que Lotario
despertase, para volverse con él fuera y preguntarle de su ventura.
»Todo le sucedió como él quiso: Lotario despertó, y luego salieron los dos
de casa, y así, le preguntó lo que deseaba, y le respondió Lotario que no
le había parecido ser bien que la primera vez se descubriese del todo; y
así, no había hecho otra cosa que alabar a Camila de hermosa, diciéndole
que en toda la ciudad no se trataba de otra cosa que de su hermosura y
discreción, y que éste le había parecido buen principio para entrar ganando
la voluntad, y disponiéndola a que otra vez le escuchase con gusto, usando
en esto del artificio que el demonio usa cuando quiere engañar a alguno que
está puesto en atalaya de mirar por sí: que se transforma en ángel de luz,
siéndolo él de tinieblas, y, poniéndole delante apariencias buenas, al cabo
descubre quién es y sale con su intención, si a los principios no es
descubierto su engaño. Todo esto le contentó mucho a Anselmo, y dijo que
cada día daría el mesmo lugar, aunque no saliese de casa, porque en ella se
ocuparía en cosas que Camila no pudiese venir en conocimiento de su
artificio.

»Sucedió, pues, que se pasaron muchos días que, sin decir Lotario palabra a
Camila, respondía a Anselmo que la hablaba y jamás podía sacar della una
pequeña muestra de venir en ninguna cosa que mala fuese, ni aun dar una
señal de sombra de esperanza; antes, decía que le amenazaba que si de aquel
mal pensamiento no se quitaba, que lo había de decir a su esposo.
»-Bien está -dijo Anselmo-. Hasta aquí ha resistido Camila a las palabras;
es menester ver cómo resiste a las obras: yo os daré mañana dos mil escudos
de oro para que se los ofrezcáis, y aun se los deis, y otros tantos para
que compréis joyas con que cebarla; que las mujeres suelen ser aficionadas,
y más si son hermosas, por más castas que sean, a esto de traerse bien y
andar galanas; y si ella resiste a esta tentación, yo quedaré satisfecho y
no os daré más pesadumbre.

»Lotario respondió que ya que había comenzado, que él llevaría hasta el fin
aquella empresa, puesto que entendía salir della cansado y vencido. Otro
día recibió los cuatro mil escudos, y con ellos cuatro mil confusiones,
porque no sabía qué decirse para mentir de nuevo; pero, en efeto, determinó
de decirle que Camila estaba tan entera a las dádivas y promesas como a las
palabras, y que no había para qué cansarse más, porque todo el tiempo se
gastaba en balde.

»Pero la suerte, que las cosas guiaba de otra manera, ordenó que, habiendo
dejado Anselmo solos a Lotario y a Camila, como otras veces solía, él se
encerró en un aposento y por los agujeros de la cerradura estuvo mirando y
escuchando lo que los dos trataban, y vio que en más de media hora Lotario
no habló palabra a Camila, ni se la hablara si allí estuviera un siglo, y
cayó en la cuenta de que cuanto su amigo le había dicho de las respuestas
de Camila todo era ficción y mentira. Y, para ver si esto era ansí, salió
del aposento, y, llamando a Lotario aparte, le preguntó qué nuevas había y
de qué temple estaba Camila. Lotario le respondió que no pensaba más darle
puntada en aquel negocio, porque respondía tan áspera y desabridamente, que
no tendría ánimo para volver a decirle cosa alguna.

»-¡Ah! -dijo Anselmo-, Lotario, Lotario, y cuán mal correspondes a lo que
me debes y a lo mucho que de ti confío! Ahora te he estado mirando por el
lugar que concede la entrada desta llave, y he visto que no has dicho
palabra a Camila, por donde me doy a entender que aun las primeras le
tienes por decir; y si esto es así, como sin duda lo es, ¿para qué me
engañas, o por qué quieres quitarme con tu industria los medios que yo
podría hallar para conseguir mi deseo?

»No dijo más Anselmo, pero bastó lo que había dicho para dejar corrido y
confuso a Lotario; el cual, casi como tomando por punto de honra el haber
sido hallado en mentira, juró a Anselmo que desde aquel momento tomaba tan
a su cargo el contentalle y no mentille, cual lo vería si con curiosidad lo
espiaba; cuanto más, que no sería menester usar de ninguna diligencia,
porque la que él pensaba poner en satisfacelle le quitaría de toda
sospecha. Creyóle Anselmo, y para dalle comodidad más segura y menos
sobresaltada, determinó de hacer ausencia de su casa por ocho días, yéndose
a la de un amigo suyo, que estaba en una aldea, no lejos de la ciudad, con
el cual amigo concertó que le enviase a llamar con muchas veras, para tener
ocasión con Camila de su partida.

»¡Desdichado y mal advertido de ti, Anselmo! ¿Qué es lo que haces? ¿Qué es
lo que trazas? ¿Qué es lo que ordenas? Mira que haces contra ti mismo,
trazando tu deshonra y ordenando tu perdición. Buena es tu esposa Camila,
quieta y sosegadamente la posees, nadie sobresalta tu gusto, sus
pensamientos no salen de las paredes de su casa, tú eres su cielo en la
tierra, el blanco de sus deseos, el cumplimiento de sus gustos y la medida
por donde mide su voluntad, ajustándola en todo con la tuya y con la del
cielo. Pues si la mina de su honor, hermosura, honestidad y recogimiento te
da sin ningún trabajo toda la riqueza que tiene y tú puedes desear, ¿para
qué quieres ahondar la tierra y buscar nuevas vetas de nuevo y nunca visto
tesoro, poniéndote a peligro que toda venga abajo, pues, en fin, se
sustenta sobre los débiles arrimos de su flaca naturaleza? Mira que el que
busca lo imposible es justo que lo posible se le niegue, como lo dijo mejor
un poeta, diciendo:

   Busco en la muerte la vida,
   salud en la enfermedad,
   en la prisión libertad,
   en lo cerrado salida
   y en el traidor lealtad.
   Pero mi suerte, de quien
   jamás espero algún bien,
   con el cielo ha estatuido
   que, pues lo imposible pido,
   lo posible aun no me den.

»Fuese otro día Anselmo a la aldea, dejando dicho a Camila que el tiempo
que él estuviese ausente vendría Lotario a mirar por su casa y a comer con
ella; que tuviese cuidado de tratalle como a su mesma persona. Afligióse
Camila, como mujer discreta y honrada, de la orden que su marido le dejaba,
y díjole que advirtiese que no estaba bien que nadie, él ausente, ocupase
la silla de su mesa, y que si lo hacía por no tener confianza que ella
sabría gobernar su casa, que probase por aquella vez, y vería por
experiencia como para mayores cuidados era bastante. Anselmo le replicó que
aquél era su gusto, y que no tenía más que hacer que bajar la cabeza y
obedecelle. Camila dijo que ansí lo haría, aunque contra su voluntad.
»Partióse Anselmo, y otro día vino a su casa Lotario, donde fue rescebido
de Camila con amoroso y honesto acogimiento; la cual jamás se puso en parte
donde Lotario la viese a solas, porque siempre andaba rodeada de sus
criados y criadas, especialmente de una doncella suya, llamada Leonela, a
quien ella mucho quería, por haberse criado desde niñas las dos juntas en
casa de los padres de Camila, y cuando se casó con Anselmo la trujo
consigo.

»En los tres días primeros nunca Lotario le dijo nada, aunque pudiera,
cuando se levantaban los manteles y la gente se iba a comer con mucha
priesa, porque así se lo tenía mandado Camila. Y aun tenía orden Leonela
que comiese primero que Camila, y que de su lado jamás se quitase; mas
ella, que en otras cosas de su gusto tenía puesto el pensamiento y había
menester aquellas horas y aquel lugar para ocuparle en sus contentos, no
cumplía todas veces el mandamiento de su señora; antes, los dejaba solos,
como si aquello le hubieran mandado. Mas la honesta presencia de Camila, la
gravedad de su rostro, la compostura de su persona era tanta, que ponía
freno a la lengua de Lotario.

»Pero el provecho que las muchas virtudes de Camila hicieron, poniendo
silencio en la lengua de Lotario, redundó más en daño de los dos, porque si
la lengua callaba, el pensamiento discurría y tenía lugar de contemplar,
parte por parte, todos los estremos de bondad y de hermosura que Camila
tenía, bastantes a enamorar una estatua de mármol, no que un corazón de
carne.

»Mirábala Lotario en el lugar y espacio que había de hablarla, y
consideraba cuán digna era de ser amada; y esta consideración comenzó poco
a poco a dar asaltos a los respectos que a Anselmo tenía, y mil veces quiso
ausentarse de la ciudad y irse donde jamás Anselmo le viese a él, ni él
viese a Camila; mas ya le hacía impedimento y detenía el gusto que hallaba
en mirarla. Hacíase fuerza y peleaba consigo mismo por desechar y no sentir
el contento que le llevaba a mirar a Camila. Culpábase a solas de su
desatino, llamábase mal amigo y aun mal cristiano; hacía discursos y
comparaciones entre él y Anselmo, y todos paraban en decir que más había
sido la locura y confianza de Anselmo que su poca fidelidad, y que si así
tuviera disculpa para con Dios como para con los hombres de lo que pensaba
hacer, que no temiera pena por su culpa.

»En efecto, la hermosura y la bondad de Camila, juntamente con la ocasión
que el ignorante marido le había puesto en las manos, dieron con la lealtad
de Lotario en tierra. Y, sin mirar a otra cosa que aquella a que su gusto
le inclinaba, al cabo de tres días de la ausencia de Anselmo, en los cuales
estuvo en continua batalla por resistir a sus deseos, comenzó a requebrar a
Camila, con tanta turbación y con tan amorosas razones que Camila quedó
suspensa, y no hizo otra cosa que levantarse de donde estaba y entrarse a
su aposento, sin respondelle palabra alguna. Mas no por esta sequedad se
desmayó en Lotario la esperanza, que siempre nace juntamente con el amor;
antes, tuvo en más a Camila. La cual, habiendo visto en Lotario lo que
jamás pensara, no sabía qué hacerse. Y, pareciéndole no ser cosa segura ni
bien hecha darle ocasión ni lugar a que otra vez la hablase, determinó de
enviar aquella mesma noche, como lo hizo, a un criado suyo con un billete a
Anselmo, donde le escribió estas razones:





Capítulo XXXIV. Donde se prosigue la novela del Curioso impertinente


»Así como suele decirse que parece mal el ejército sin su general y el
castillo sin su castellano, digo yo que parece muy peor la mujer casada y
moza sin su marido, cuando justísimas ocasiones no lo impiden. Yo me hallo
tan mal sin vos, y tan imposibilitada de no poder sufrir esta ausencia, que
si presto no venís, me habré de ir a entretener en casa de mis padres,
aunque deje sin guarda la vuestra; porque la que me dejastes, si es que
quedó con tal título, creo que mira más por su gusto que por lo que a vos
os toca; y, pues sois discreto, no tengo más que deciros, ni aun es bien
que más os diga.

»Esta carta recibió Anselmo, y entendió por ella que Lotario había ya
comenzado la empresa, y que Camila debía de haber respondido como él
deseaba; y, alegre sobremanera de tales nuevas, respondió a Camila, de
palabra, que no hiciese mudamiento de su casa en modo ninguno, porque él
volvería con mucha brevedad. Admirada quedó Camila de la respuesta de
Anselmo, que la puso en más confusión que primero, porque ni se atrevía a
estar en su casa, ni menos irse a la de sus padres; porque en la quedada
corría peligro su honestidad, y en la ida iba contra el mandamiento de su
esposo.

»En fin, se resolvió en lo que le estuvo peor, que fue en el quedarse, con
determinación de no huir la presencia de Lotario, por no dar que decir a
sus criados; y ya le pesaba de haber escrito lo que escribió a su esposo,
temerosa de que no pensase que Lotario había visto en ella alguna
desenvoltura que le hubiese movido a no guardalle el decoro que debía.
Pero, fiada en su bondad, se fió en Dios y en su buen pensamiento, con que
pensaba resistir callando a todo aquello que Lotario decirle quisiese, sin
dar más cuenta a su marido, por no ponerle en alguna pendencia y trabajo. Y
aun andaba buscando manera como disculpar a Lotario con Anselmo, cuando le
preguntase la ocasión que le había movido a escribirle aquel papel. Con
estos pensamientos, más honrados que acertados ni provechosos, estuvo otro
día escuchando a Lotario, el cual cargó la mano de manera que comenzó a
titubear la firmeza de Camila, y su honestidad tuvo harto que hacer en
acudir a los ojos, para que no diesen muestra de alguna amorosa compasión
que las lágrimas y las razones de Lotario en su pecho habían despertado.
Todo esto notaba Lotario, y todo le encendía.

»Finalmente, a él le pareció que era menester, en el espacio y lugar que
daba la ausencia de Anselmo, apretar el cerco a aquella fortaleza. Y así,
acometió a su presunción con las alabanzas de su hermosura, porque no hay
cosa que más presto rinda y allane las encastilladas torres de la vanidad
de las hermosas que la mesma vanidad, puesta en las lenguas de la
adulación. En efecto, él, con toda diligencia, minó la roca de su entereza,
con tales pertrechos que, aunque Camila fuera toda de bronce, viniera al
suelo. Lloró, rogó, ofreció, aduló, porfió, y fingió Lotario con tantos
sentimientos, con muestras de tantas veras, que dio al través con el recato
de Camila y vino a triunfar de lo que menos se pensaba y más deseaba.
»Rindióse Camila, Camila se rindió; pero, ¿qué mucho, si la amistad de
Lotario no quedó en pie? Ejemplo claro que nos muestra que sólo se vence la
pasión amorosa con huilla, y que nadie se ha de poner a brazos con tan
poderoso enemigo, porque es menester fuerzas divinas para vencer las suyas
humanas. Sólo supo Leonela la flaqueza de su señora, porque no se la
pudieron encubrir los dos malos amigos y nuevos amantes. No quiso Lotario
decir a Camila la pretensión de Anselmo, ni que él le había dado lugar para
llegar a aquel punto, porque no tuviese en menos su amor y pensase que así,
acaso y sin pensar, y no de propósito, la había solicitado.

»Volvió de allí a pocos días Anselmo a su casa, y no echó de ver lo que
faltaba en ella, que era lo que en menos tenía y más estimaba. Fuese luego
a ver a Lotario, y hallóle en su casa; abrazáronse los dos, y el uno
preguntó por las nuevas de su vida o de su muerte.

»-Las nuevas que te podré dar, ¡oh amigo Anselmo! -dijo Lotario-, son de
que tienes una mujer que dignamente puede ser ejemplo y corona de todas las
mujeres buenas. Las palabras que le he dicho se las ha llevado el aire, los
ofrecimientos se han tenido en poco, las dádivas no se han admitido, de
algunas lágrimas fingidas mías se ha hecho burla notable. En resolución,
así como Camila es cifra de toda belleza, es archivo donde asiste la
honestidad y vive el comedimiento y el recato, y todas las virtudes que
pueden hacer loable y bien afortunada a una honrada mujer. Vuelve a tomar
tus dineros, amigo, que aquí los tengo, sin haber tenido necesidad de tocar
a ellos; que la entereza de Camila no se rinde a cosas tan bajas como son
dádivas ni promesas. Conténtate, Anselmo, y no quieras hacer más pruebas de
las hechas; y, pues a pie enjuto has pasado el mar de las dificultades y
sospechas que de las mujeres suelen y pueden tenerse, no quieras entrar de
nuevo en el profundo piélago de nuevos inconvenientes, ni quieras hacer
experiencia con otro piloto de la bondad y fortaleza del navío que el cielo
te dio en suerte para que en él pasases la mar deste mundo, sino haz cuenta
que estás ya en seguro puerto, y aférrate con las áncoras de la buena
consideración, y déjate estar hasta que te vengan a pedir la deuda que no
hay hidalguía humana que de pagarla se escuse.

»Contentísimo quedó Anselmo de las razones de Lotario, y así se las creyó
como si fueran dichas por algún oráculo. Pero, con todo eso, le rogó que no
dejase la empresa, aunque no fuese más de por curiosidad y entretenimiento,
aunque no se aprovechase de allí adelante de tan ahincadas diligencias como
hasta entonces; y que sólo quería que le escribiese algunos versos en su
alabanza, debajo del nombre de Clori, porque él le daría a entender a
Camila que andaba enamorado de una dama, a quien le había puesto aquel
nombre por poder celebrarla con el decoro que a su honestidad se le debía;
y que, cuando Lotario no quisiera tomar trabajo de escribir los versos, que
él los haría.

»-No será menester eso -dijo Lotario-, pues no me son tan enemigas las
musas que algunos ratos del año no me visiten. Dile tú a Camila lo que has
dicho del fingimiento de mis amores, que los versos yo los haré; si no tan
buenos como el subjeto merece, serán, por lo menos, los mejores que yo
pudiere.

»Quedaron deste acuerdo el impertinente y el traidor amigo; y, vuelto
Anselmo a su casa, preguntó a Camila lo que ella ya se maravillaba que no
se lo hubiese preguntado: que fue que le dijese la ocasión por que le había
escrito el papel que le envió. Camila le respondió que le había parecido
que Lotario la miraba un poco más desenvueltamente que cuando él estaba en
casa; pero que ya estaba desengañada y creía que había sido imaginación
suya, porque ya Lotario huía de vella y de estar con ella a solas. Díjole
Anselmo que bien podía estar segura de aquella sospecha, porque él sabía
que Lotario andaba enamorado de una doncella principal de la ciudad, a
quien él celebraba debajo del nombre de Clori, y que, aunque no lo
estuviera, no había que temer de la verdad de Lotario y de la mucha amistad
de entrambos. Y, a no estar avisada Camila de Lotario de que eran fingidos
aquellos amores de Clori, y que él se lo había dicho a Anselmo por poder
ocuparse algunos ratos en las mismas alabanzas de Camila, ella, sin duda,
cayera en la desesperada red de los celos; mas, por estar ya advertida,
pasó aquel sobresalto sin pesadumbre.

»Otro día, estando los tres sobre mesa, rogó Anselmo a Lotario dijese
alguna cosa de las que había compuesto a su amada Clori; que, pues Camila
no la conocía, seguramente podía decir lo que quisiese.

»-Aunque la conociera -respondió Lotario-, no encubriera yo nada, porque
cuando algún amante loa a su dama de hermosa y la nota de cruel, ningún
oprobrio hace a su buen crédito. Pero, sea lo que fuere, lo que sé decir,
que ayer hice un soneto a la ingratitud desta Clori, que dice ansí:
Soneto

   En el silencio de la noche, cuando
   ocupa el dulce sueño a los mortales,
   la pobre cuenta de mis ricos males
   estoy al cielo y a mi Clori dando.
   Y, al tiempo cuando el sol se va mostrando
   por las rosadas puertas orientales,
   con suspiros y acentos desiguales,
   voy la antigua querella renovando.
   Y cuando el sol, de su estrellado asiento,
   derechos rayos a la tierra envía,
   el llanto crece y doblo los gemidos.
   Vuelve la noche, y vuelvo al triste cuento,
   y siempre hallo, en mi mortal porfía,
   al cielo, sordo; a Clori, sin oídos.

»Bien le pareció el soneto a Camila, pero mejor a Anselmo, pues le alabó, y
dijo que era demasiadamente cruel la dama que a tan claras verdades no
correspondía. A lo que dijo Camila:

»-Luego, ¿todo aquello que los poetas enamorados dicen es verdad?

»-En cuanto poetas, no la dicen -respondió Lotario-; mas, en cuanto
enamorados, siempre quedan tan cortos como verdaderos.

»-No hay duda deso -replicó Anselmo, todo por apoyar y acreditar los
pensamientos de Lotario con Camila, tan descuidada del artificio de Anselmo
como ya enamorada de Lotario.

»Y así, con el gusto que de sus cosas tenía, y más, teniendo por entendido
que sus deseos y escritos a ella se encaminaban, y que ella era la
verdadera Clori, le rogó que si otro soneto o otros versos sabía, los
dijese:

»-Sí sé -respondió Lotario-, pero no creo que es tan bueno como el primero,
o, por mejor decir, menos malo. Y podréislo bien juzgar, pues es éste:

Soneto

   Yo sé que muero; y si no soy creído,
   es más cierto el morir, como es más cierto
   verme a tus pies, ¡oh bella ingrata!, muerto,
   antes que de adorarte arrepentido.
   Podré yo verme en la región de olvido,
   de vida y gloria y de favor desierto,
   y allí verse podrá en mi pecho abierto
   cómo tu hermoso rostro está esculpido.
   Que esta reliquia guardo para el duro
   trance que me amenaza mi porfía,
   que en tu mismo rigor se fortalece.
   ¡Ay de aquel que navega, el cielo escuro,
   por mar no usado y peligrosa vía,
   adonde norte o puerto no se ofrece!

»También alabó este segundo soneto Anselmo, como había hecho el primero, y
desta manera iba añadiendo eslabón a eslabón a la cadena con que se
enlazaba y trababa su deshonra, pues cuando más Lotario le deshonraba,
entonces le decía que estaba más honrado; y, con esto, todos los escalones
que Camila bajaba hacia el centro de su menosprecio, los subía, en la
opinión de su marido, hacia la cumbre de la virtud y de su buena fama.
»Sucedió en esto que, hallándose una vez, entre otras, sola Camila con su
doncella, le dijo:

»-Corrida estoy, amiga Leonela, de ver en cuán poco he sabido estimarme,
pues siquiera no hice que con el tiempo comprara Lotario la entera posesión
que le di tan presto de mi voluntad. Temo que ha de estimar mi presteza o
ligereza, sin que eche de ver la fuerza que él me hizo para no poder
resistirle.

»-No te dé pena eso, señora mía -respondió Leonela-, que no está la monta,
ni es causa para menguar la estimación, darse lo que se da presto, si, en
efecto, lo que se da es bueno, y ello por sí digno de estimarse. Y aun
suele decirse que el que luego da, da dos veces.

»-También se suele decir -dijo Camila- que lo que cuesta poco se estima en
menos.

»-No corre por ti esa razón -respondió Leonela-, porque el amor, según he
oído decir, unas veces vuela y otras anda, con éste corre y con aquél va
despacio, a unos entibia y a otros abrasa, a unos hiere y a otros mata, en
un mesmo punto comienza la carrera de sus deseos y en aquel mesmo punto la
acaba y concluye, por la mañana suele poner el cerco a una fortaleza y a la
noche la tiene rendida, porque no hay fuerza que le resista. Y, siendo así,
¿de qué te espantas, o de qué temes, si lo mismo debe de haber acontecido a
Lotario, habiendo tomado el amor por instrumento de rendirnos la ausencia
de mi señor? Y era forzoso que en ella se concluyese lo que el amor tenía
determinado, sin dar tiempo al tiempo para que Anselmo le tuviese de
volver, y con su presencia quedase imperfecta la obra. Porque el amor no
tiene otro mejor ministro para ejecutar lo que desea que es la ocasión: de
la ocasión se sirve en todos sus hechos, principalmente en los principios.
Todo esto sé yo muy bien, más de experiencia que de oídas, y algún día te
lo diré, señora, que yo también soy de carne y de sangre moza. Cuanto más,
señora Camila, que no te entregaste ni diste tan luego, que primero no
hubieses visto en los ojos, en los suspiros, en las razones y en las
promesas y dádivas de Lotario toda su alma, viendo en ella y en sus
virtudes cuán digno era Lotario de ser amado. Pues si esto es ansí, no te
asalten la imaginación esos escrupulosos y melindrosos pensamientos, sino
asegúrate que Lotario te estima como tú le estimas a él, y vive con
contento y satisfación de que, ya que caíste en el lazo amoroso, es el que
te aprieta de valor y de estima. Y que no sólo tiene las cuatro eses que
dicen que han de tener los buenos enamorados, sino todo un ABC entero: si
no, escúchame y verás como te le digo de coro. Él es, según yo veo y a mí
me parece, agradecido, bueno, caballero, dadivoso, enamorado, firme,
gallardo, honrado, ilustre, leal, mozo, noble, onesto, principal,
quantioso, rico, y las eses que dicen; y luego, tácito, verdadero. La X no
le cuadra, porque es letra áspera; la Y ya está dicha; la Z, zelador de tu
honra.

»Rióse Camila del ABC de su doncella, y túvola por más plática en las cosas
de amor que ella decía; y así lo confesó ella, descubriendo a Camila como
trataba amores con un mancebo bien nacido, de la mesma ciudad; de lo cual
se turbó Camila, temiendo que era aquél camino por donde su honra podía
correr riesgo. Apuróla si pasaban sus pláticas a más que serlo. Ella, con
poca vergüenza y mucha desenvoltura, le respondió que sí pasaban; porque es
cosa ya cierta que los descuidos de las señoras quitan la vergüenza a las
criadas, las cuales, cuando ven a las amas echar traspiés, no se les da
nada a ellas de cojear, ni de que lo sepan.

»No pudo hacer otra cosa Camila sino rogar a Leonela no dijese nada de su
hecho al que decía ser su amante, y que tratase sus cosas con secreto,
porque no viniesen a noticia de Anselmo ni de Lotario. Leonela respondió
que así lo haría, mas cumpliólo de manera que hizo cierto el temor de
Camila de que por ella había de perder su crédito. Porque la deshonesta y
atrevida Leonela, después que vio que el proceder de su ama no era el que
solía, atrevióse a entrar y poner dentro de casa a su amante, confiada que,
aunque su señora le viese, no había de osar descubrille; que este daño
acarrean, entre otros, los pecados de las señoras: que se hacen esclavas de
sus mesmas criadas y se obligan a encubrirles sus deshonestidades y
vilezas, como aconteció con Camila; que, aunque vio una y muchas veces que
su Leonela estaba con su galán en un aposento de su casa, no sólo no la
osaba reñir, mas dábale lugar a que lo encerrase, y quitábale todos los
estorbos, para que no fuese visto de su marido.

»Pero no los pudo quitar que Lotario no le viese una vez salir, al romper
del alba; el cual, sin conocer quién era, pensó primero que debía de ser
alguna fantasma; mas, cuando le vio caminar, embozarse y encubrirse con
cuidado y recato, cayó de su simple pensamiento y dio en otro, que fuera la
perdición de todos si Camila no lo remediara. Pensó Lotario que aquel
hombre que había visto salir tan a deshora de casa de Anselmo no había
entrado en ella por Leonela, ni aun se acordó si Leonela era en el mundo;
sólo creyó que Camila, de la misma manera que había sido fácil y ligera con
él, lo era para otro; que estas añadiduras trae consigo la maldad de la
mujer mala: que pierde el crédito de su honra con el mesmo a quien se
entregó rogada y persuadida, y cree que con mayor facilidad se entrega a
otros, y da infalible crédito a cualquiera sospecha que desto le venga. Y
no parece sino que le faltó a Lotario en este punto todo su buen
entendimiento, y se le fueron de la memoria todos sus advertidos discursos,
pues, sin hacer alguno que bueno fuese, ni aun razonable, sin más ni más,
antes que Anselmo se levantase, impaciente y ciego de la celosa rabia que
las entrañas le roía, muriendo por vengarse de Camila, que en ninguna cosa
le había ofendido, se fue a Anselmo y le dijo:

»-Sábete, Anselmo, que ha muchos días que he andado peleando conmigo mesmo,
haciéndome fuerza a no decirte lo que ya no es posible ni justo que más te
encubra. Sábete que la fortaleza de Camila está ya rendida y sujeta a todo
aquello que yo quisiere hacer della; y si he tardado en descubrirte esta
verdad, ha sido por ver si era algún liviano antojo suyo, o si lo hacía por
probarme y ver si eran con propósito firme tratados los amores que, con tu
licencia, con ella he comenzado. Creí, ansimismo, que ella, si fuera la que
debía y la que entrambos pensábamos, ya te hubiera dado cuenta de mi
solicitud, pero, habiendo visto que se tarda, conozco que son verdaderas
las promesas que me ha dado de que, cuando otra vez hagas ausencia de tu
casa, me hablará en la recámara, donde está el repuesto de tus alhajas -y
era la verdad, que allí le solía hablar Camila-; y no quiero que
precipitosamente corras a hacer alguna venganza, pues no está aún cometido
el pecado sino con pensamiento, y podría ser que, desde éste hasta el
tiempo de ponerle por obra, se mudase el de Camila y naciese en su lugar el
arrepentimiento. Y así, ya que, en todo o en parte, has seguido siempre mis
consejos, sigue y guarda uno que ahora te diré, para que sin engaño y con
medroso advertimento te satisfagas de aquello que más vieres que te
convenga. Finge que te ausentas por dos o tres días, como otras veces
sueles, y haz de manera que te quedes escondido en tu recámara, pues los
tapices que allí hay y otras cosas con que te puedas encubrir te ofrecen
mucha comodidad, y entonces verás por tus mismos ojos, y yo por los míos,
lo que Camila quiere; y si fuere la maldad que se puede temer antes que
esperar, con silencio, sagacidad y discreción podrás ser el verdugo de tu
agravio.

»Absorto, suspenso y admirado quedó Anselmo con las razones de Lotario,
porque le cogieron en tiempo donde menos las esperaba oír, porque ya tenía
a Camila por vencedora de los fingidos asaltos de Lotario y comenzaba a
gozar la gloria del vencimiento. Callando estuvo por un buen espacio,
mirando al suelo sin mover pestaña, y al cabo dijo:

»-Tú lo has hecho, Lotario, como yo esperaba de tu amistad; en todo he de
seguir tu consejo: haz lo que quisieres y guarda aquel secreto que ves que
conviene en caso tan no pensado.

»Prometióselo Lotario, y, en apartándose dél, se arrepintió totalmente de
cuanto le había dicho, viendo cuán neciamente había andado, pues pudiera él
vengarse de Camila, y no por camino tan cruel y tan deshonrado. Maldecía su
entendimiento, afeaba su ligera determinación, y no sabía qué medio tomarse
para deshacer lo hecho, o para dalle alguna razonable salida. Al fin,
acordó de dar cuenta de todo a Camila; y, como no faltaba lugar para
poderlo hacer, aquel mismo día la halló sola, y ella, así como vio que le
podía hablar, le dijo.

»-Sabed, amigo Lotario, que tengo una pena en el corazón que me le aprieta
de suerte que parece que quiere reventar en el pecho, y ha de ser maravilla
si no lo hace, pues ha llegado la desvergüenza de Leonela a tanto, que cada
noche encierra a un galán suyo en esta casa y se está con él hasta el día,
tan a costa de mi crédito cuanto le quedará campo abierto de juzgarlo al
que le viere salir a horas tan inusitadas de mi casa. Y lo que me fatiga es
que no la puedo castigar ni reñir: que el ser ella secretario de nuestros
tratos me ha puesto un freno en la boca para callar los suyos, y temo que
de aquí ha de nacer algún mal suceso.

»Al principio que Camila esto decía creyó Lotario que era artificio para
desmentille que el hombre que había visto salir era de Leonela, y no suyo;
pero, viéndola llorar y afligirse, y pedirle remedio, vino a creer la
verdad, y, en creyéndola, acabó de estar confuso y arrepentido del todo.
Pero, con todo esto, respondió a Camila que no tuviese pena, que él
ordenaría remedio para atajar la insolencia de Leonela. Díjole asimismo lo
que, instigado de la furiosa rabia de los celos, había dicho a Anselmo, y
cómo estaba concertado de esconderse en la recámara, para ver desde allí a
la clara la poca lealtad que ella le guardaba. Pidióle perdón desta locura,
y consejo para poder remedialla y salir bien de tan revuelto laberinto como
su mal discurso le había puesto.

»Espantada quedó Camila de oír lo que Lotario le decía, y con mucho enojo y
muchas y discretas razones le riñó y afeó su mal pensamiento y la simple y
mala determinación que había tenido. Pero, como naturalmente tiene la mujer
ingenio presto para el bien y para el mal más que el varón, puesto que le
va faltando cuando de propósito se pone a hacer discursos, luego al
instante halló Camila el modo de remediar tan al parecer inremediable
negocio, y dijo a Lotario que procurase que otro día se escondiese Anselmo
donde decía, porque ella pensaba sacar de su escondimiento comodidad para
que desde allí en adelante los dos se gozasen sin sobresalto alguno; y, sin
declararle del todo su pensamiento, le advirtió que tuviese cuidado que, en
estando Anselmo escondido, él viniese cuando Leonela le llamase, y que a
cuanto ella le dijese le respondiese como respondiera aunque no supiera que
Anselmo le escuchaba. Porfió Lotario que le acabase de declarar su
intención, porque con más seguridad y aviso guardase todo lo que viese ser
necesario.

»-Digo -dijo Camila- que no hay más que guardar, si no fuere responderme
como yo os preguntare (no queriendo Camila darle antes cuenta de lo que
pensaba hacer, temerosa que no quisiese seguir el parecer que a ella tan
bueno le parecía, y siguiese o buscase otros que no podrían ser tan
buenos).

»Con esto, se fue Lotario; y Anselmo, otro día, con la escusa de ir aquella
aldea de su amigo, se partió y volvió a esconderse: que lo pudo hacer con
comodidad, porque de industria se la dieron Camila y Leonela.
»Escondido, pues, Anselmo, con aquel sobresalto que se puede imaginar que
tendría el que esperaba ver por sus ojos hacer notomía de las entrañas de
su honra, íbase a pique de perder el sumo bien que él pensaba que tenía en
su querida Camila. Seguras ya y ciertas Camila y Leonela que Anselmo estaba
escondido, entraron en la recámara; y apenas hubo puesto los pies en ella
Camilia, cuando, dando un grande suspiro, dijo:

»-¡Ay, Leonela amiga! ¿No sería mejor que, antes que llegase a poner en
ejecución lo que no quiero que sepas, porque no procures estorbarlo, que
tomases la daga de Anselmo, que te he pedido, y pasases con ella este
infame pecho mío? Pero no hagas tal, que no será razón que yo lleve la pena
de la ajena culpa. Primero quiero saber qué es lo que vieron en mí los
atrevidos y deshonestos ojos de Lotario que fuese causa de darle
atrevimiento a descubrirme un tan mal deseo como es el que me ha
descubierto, en desprecio de su amigo y en deshonra mía. Ponte, Leonela, a
esa ventana y llámale, que, sin duda alguna, él debe de estar en la calle,
esperando poner en efeto su mala intención. Pero primero se pondrá la cruel
cuanto honrada mía.

»-¡Ay, señora mía! -respondió la sagaz y advertida Leonela-, y ¿qué es lo
que quieres hacer con esta daga? ¿Quieres por ventura quitarte la vida o
quitársela a Lotario? Que cualquiera destas cosas que quieras ha de
redundar en pérdida de tu crédito y fama. Mejor es que disimules tu
agravio, y no des lugar a que este mal hombre entre ahora en esta casa y
nos halle solas. Mira, señora, que somos flacas mujeres, y él es hombre y
determinado; y, como viene con aquel mal propósito, ciego y apasionado,
quizá antes que tú pongas en ejecución el tuyo, hará él lo que te estaría
más mal que quitarte la vida. ¡Mal haya mi señor Anselmo, que tanto mal ha
querido dar a este desuellacaras en su casa! Y ya, señora, que le mates,
como yo pienso que quieres hacer, ¿qué hemos de hacer dél después de
muerto?

»-¿Qué, amiga? -respondió Camila-: dejarémosle para que Anselmo le
entierre, pues será justo que tenga por descanso el trabajo que tomare en
poner debajo de la tierra su misma infamia. Llámale, acaba, que todo el
tiempo que tardo en tomar la debida venganza de mi agravio parece que
ofendo a la lealtad que a mi esposo debo.

»Todo esto escuchaba Anselmo, y, a cada palabra que Camila decía, se le
mudaban los pensamientos; mas, cuando entendió que estaba resuelta en matar
a Lotario, quiso salir y descubrirse, porque tal cosa no se hiciese; pero
detúvole el deseo de ver en qué paraba tanta gallardía y honesta
resolución, con propósito de salir a tiempo que la estorbase.

»Tomóle en esto a Camila un fuerte desmayo, y, arrojándose encima de una
cama que allí estaba, comenzó Leonela a llorar muy amargamente y a decir:
»-¡Ay, desdichada de mí si fuese tan sin ventura que se me muriese aquí
entre mis brazos la flor de la honestidad del mundo, la corona de las
buenas mujeres, el ejemplo de la castidad...!

»Con otras cosas a éstas semejantes, que ninguno la escuchara que no la
tuviera por la más lastimada y leal doncella del mundo, y a su señora por
otra nueva y perseguida Penélope. Poco tardó en volver de su desmayo
Camila; y, al volver en sí, dijo:

»-¿Por qué no vas, Leonela, a llamar al más leal amigo de amigo que vio el
sol o cubrió la noche? Acaba, corre, aguija, camina, no se esfogue con la
tardanza el fuego de la cólera que tengo, y se pase en amenazas y
maldiciones la justa venganza que espero.

»-Ya voy a llamarle, señora mía -dijo Leonela-, mas hasme de dar primero
esa daga, porque no hagas cosa, en tanto que falto, que dejes con ella que
llorar toda la vida a todos los que bien te quieren.

»-Ve segura, Leonela amiga, que no haré -respondió Camila-; porque, ya que
sea atrevida y simple a tu parecer en volver por mi honra, no lo he de ser
tanto como aquella Lucrecia de quien dicen que se mató sin haber cometido
error alguno, y sin haber muerto primero a quien tuvo la causa de su
desgracia. Yo moriré, si muero, pero ha de ser vengada y satisfecha del que
me ha dado ocasión de venir a este lugar a llorar sus atrevimientos,
nacidos tan sin culpa mía.

»Mucho se hizo de rogar Leonela antes que saliese a llamar a Lotario, pero,
en fin, salió; y, entre tanto que volvía, quedó Camilia diciendo, como que
hablaba consigo misma:

»-¡Válame Dios! ¿No fuera más acertado haber despedido a Lotario, como
otras muchas veces lo he hecho, que no ponerle en condición, como ya le he
puesto, que me tenga por deshonesta y mala, siquiera este tiempo que he de
tardar en desengañarle? Mejor fuera, sin duda; pero no quedara yo vengada,
ni la honra de mi marido satisfecha, si tan a manos lavadas y tan a paso
llano se volviera a salir de donde sus malos pensamientos le entraron.
Pague el traidor con la vida lo que intentó con tan lascivo deseo: sepa el
mundo, si acaso llegare a saberlo, de que Camila no sólo guardó la lealtad
a su esposo, sino que le dio venganza del que se atrevió a ofendelle. Mas,
con todo, creo que fuera mejor dar cuenta desto a Anselmo, pero ya se la
apunté a dar en la carta que le escribí al aldea, y creo que el no acudir
él al remedio del daño que allí le señalé, debió de ser que, de puro bueno
y confiado, no quiso ni pudo creer que en el pecho de su tan firme amigo
pudiese caber género de pensamiento que contra su honra fuese; ni aun yo lo
creí después, por muchos días, ni lo creyera jamás, si su insolencia no
llegara a tanto, que las manifiestas dádivas y las largas promesas y las
continuas lágrimas no me lo manifestaran. Mas, ¿para qué hago yo ahora
estos discursos? ¿Tiene, por ventura, una resulución gallarda necesidad de
consejo alguno? No, por cierto. ¡Afuera, pues, traidores; aquí, venganzas!
¡Entre el falso, venga, llegue, muera y acabe, y suceda lo que sucediere!
Limpia entré en poder del que el cielo me dio por mío, limpia he de salir
dél; y, cuando mucho, saldré bañada en mi casta sangre, y en la impura del
más falso amigo que vio la amistad en el mundo.

»Y, diciendo esto, se paseaba por la sala con la daga desenvainada, dando
tan desconcertados y desaforados pasos, y haciendo tales ademanes, que no
parecía sino que le faltaba el juicio, y que no era mujer delicada, sino un
rufián desesperado.

»Todo lo miraba Anselmo, cubierto detrás de unos tapices donde se había
escondido, y de todo se admiraba, y ya le parecía que lo que había visto y
oído era bastante satisfación para mayores sospechas; y ya quisiera que la
prueba de venir Lotario faltara, temeroso de algún mal repentino suceso. Y,
estando ya para manifestarse y salir, para abrazar y desengañar a su
esposa, se detuvo porque vio que Leonela volvía con Lotario de la mano; y,
así como Camila le vio, haciendo con la daga en el suelo una gran raya
delante della, le dijo:

»-Lotario, advierte lo que te digo: si a dicha te atrevieres a pasar desta
raya que ves, ni aun llegar a ella, en el punto que viere que lo intentas,
en ese mismo me pasaré el pecho con esta daga que en las manos tengo. Y,
antes que a esto me respondas palabra, quiero que otras algunas me
escuches; que después responderás lo que más te agradare. Lo primero,
quiero, Lotario, que me digas si conoces a Anselmo, mi marido, y en qué
opinión le tienes; y lo segundo, quiero saber también si me conoces a mí.
Respóndeme a esto, y no te turbes, ni pienses mucho lo que has de
responder, pues no son dificultades las que te pregunto.

»No era tan ignorante Lotario que, desde el primer punto que Camila le dijo
que hiciese esconder a Anselmo, no hubiese dado en la cuenta de lo que ella
pensaba hacer; y así, correspondió con su intención tan discretamente, y
tan a tiempo, que hicieran los dos pasar aquella mentira por más que cierta
verdad; y así, respondió a Camila desta manera:

»-No pensé yo, hermosa Camila, que me llamabas para preguntarme cosas tan
fuera de la intención con que yo aquí vengo. Si lo haces por dilatarme la
prometida merced, desde más lejos pudieras entretenerla, porque tanto más
fatiga el bien deseado cuanto la esperanza está más cerca de poseello;
pero, porque no digas que no respondo a tus preguntas, digo que conozco a
tu esposo Anselmo, y nos conocemos los dos desde nuestros más tiernos años;
y no quiero decir lo que tú tan bien sabes de nuestra amistad, por no me
hacer testigo del agravio que el amor hace que le haga, poderosa disculpa
de mayores yerros. A ti te conozco y tengo en la misma posesión que él te
tiene; que, a no ser así, por menos prendas que las tuyas no había yo de ir
contra lo que debo a ser quien soy y contra las santas leyes de la
verdadera amistad, ahora por tan poderoso enemigo como el amor por mí
rompidas y violadas.

»-Si eso confiesas -respondió Camila-, enemigo mortal de todo aquello que
justamente merece ser amado, ¿con qué rostro osas parecer ante quien sabes
que es el espejo donde se mira aquel en quien tú te debieras mirar, para
que vieras con cuán poca ocasión le agravias? Pero ya cayo, ¡ay, desdichada
de mí!, en la cuenta de quién te ha hecho tener tan poca con lo que a ti
mismo debes, que debe de haber sido alguna desenvoltura mía, que no quiero
llamarla deshonestidad, pues no habrá procedido de deliberada
determinación, sino de algún descuido de los que las mujeres que piensan
que no tienen de quién recatarse suelen hacer inadvertidamente. Si no,
dime: ¿cuándo, ¡oh traidor!, respondí a tus ruegos con alguna palabra o
señal que pudiese despertar en ti alguna sombra de esperanza de cumplir tus
infames deseos? ¿Cuándo tus amorosas palabras no fueron deshechas y
reprehendidas de las mías con rigor y con aspereza? ¿Cuándo tus muchas
promesas y mayores dádivas fueron de mí creídas, ni admitidas? Pero, por
parecerme que alguno no puede perseverar en el intento amoroso luengo
tiempo, si no es sustentado de alguna esperanza, quiero atribuirme a mí la
culpa de tu impertinencia, pues, sin duda, algún descuido mío ha sustentado
tanto tiempo tu cuidado; y así, quiero castigarme y darme la pena que tu
culpa merece. Y, porque vieses que, siendo conmigo tan inhumana, no era
posible dejar de serlo contigo, quise traerte a ser testigo del sacrificio
que pienso hacer a la ofendida honra de mi tan honrado marido, agraviado de
ti con el mayor cuidado que te ha sido posible, y de mí también con el poco
recato que he tenido del huir la ocasión, si alguna te di, para favorecer y
canonizar tus malas intenciones. Torno a decir que la sospecha que tengo
que algún descuido mío engendró en ti tan desvariados pensamientos es la
que más me fatiga, y la que yo más deseo castigar con mis propias manos,
porque, castigándome otro verdugo, quizá sería más pública mi culpa; pero,
antes que esto haga, quiero matar muriendo, y llevar conmigo quien me acabe
de satisfacer el deseo de la venganza que espero y tengo, viendo allá,
dondequiera que fuere, la pena que da la justicia desinteresada y que no se
dobla al que en términos tan desesperados me ha puesto.

»Y, diciendo estas razones, con una increíble fuerza y ligereza arremetió a
Lotario con la daga desenvainada, con tales muestras de querer enclavársela
en el pecho, que casi él estuvo en duda si aquellas demostraciones eran
falsas o verdaderas, porque le fue forzoso valerse de su industria y de su
fuerza para estorbar que Camila no le diese. La cual tan vivamente fingía
aquel estraño embuste y fealdad que, por dalle color de verdad, la quiso
matizar con su misma sangre; porque, viendo que no podía haber a Lotario, o
fingiendo que no podía, dijo:

»-Pues la suerte no quiere satisfacer del todo mi tan justo deseo, a lo
menos, no será tan poderosa que, en parte, me quite que no le satisfaga.
Y, haciendo fuerza para soltar la mano de la daga, que Lotario la tenía
asida, la sacó, y, guiando su punta por parte que pudiese herir no
profundamente, se la entró y escondió por más arriba de la islilla del lado
izquierdo, junto al hombro, y luego se dejó caer en el suelo, como
desmayada.

»Estaban Leonela y Lotario suspensos y atónitos de tal suceso, y todavía
dudaban de la verdad de aquel hecho, viendo a Camila tendida en tierra y
bañada en su sangre. Acudió Lotario con mucha presteza, despavorido y sin
aliento, a sacar la daga, y, en ver la pequeña herida, salió del temor que
hasta entonces tenía, y de nuevo se admiró de la sagacidad, prudencia y
mucha discreción de la hermosa Camila; y, por acudir con lo que a él le
tocaba, comenzó a hacer una larga y triste lamentación sobre el cuerpo de
Camila, como si estuviera difunta, echándose muchas maldiciones, no sólo a
él, sino al que había sido causa de habelle puesto en aquel término. Y,
como sabía que le escuchaba su amigo Anselmo, decía cosas que el que le
oyera le tuviera mucha más lástima que a Camila, aunque por muerta la
juzgara.

»Leonela la tomó en brazos y la puso en el lecho, suplicando a Lotario
fuese a buscar quien secretamente a Camila curase; pedíale asimismo consejo
y parecer de lo que dirían a Anselmo de aquella herida de su señora, si
acaso viniese antes que estuviese sana. Él respondió que dijesen lo que
quisiesen, que él no estaba para dar consejo que de provecho fuese; sólo le
dijo que procurase tomarle la sangre, porque él se iba adonde gentes no le
viesen. Y, con muestras de mucho dolor y sentimiento, se salió de casa; y,
cuando se vio solo y en parte donde nadie le veía, no cesaba de hacerse
cruces, maravillándose de la industria de Camila y de los ademanes tan
proprios de Leonela. Consideraba cuán enterado había de quedar Anselmo de
que tenía por mujer a una segunda Porcia, y deseaba verse con él para
celebrar los dos la mentira y la verdad más disimulada que jamás pudiera
imaginarse.

»Leonela tomó, como se ha dicho, la sangre a su señora, que no era más de
aquello que bastó para acreditar su embuste; y, lavando con un poco de vino
la herida, se la ató lo mejor que supo, diciendo tales razones, en tanto
que la curaba, que, aunque no hubieran precedido otras, bastaran a hacer
creer a Anselmo que tenía en Camila un simulacro de la honestidad.
»Juntáronse a las palabras de Leonela otras de Camila, llamándose cobarde y
de poco ánimo, pues le había faltado al tiempo que fuera más necesario
tenerle, para quitarse la vida, que tan aborrecida tenía. Pedía consejo a
su doncella si daría, o no, todo aquel suceso a su querido esposo; la cual
le dijo que no se lo dijese, porque le pondría en obligación de vengarse de
Lotario, lo cual no podría ser sin mucho riesgo suyo, y que la buena mujer
estaba obligada a no dar ocasión a su marido a que riñese, sino a quitalle
todas aquellas que le fuese posible.

»Respondió Camila que le parecía muy bien su parecer y que ella le
seguiría; pero que en todo caso convenía buscar qué decir a Anselmo de la
causa de aquella herida, que él no podría dejar de ver; a lo que Leonela
respondía que ella, ni aun burlando, no sabía mentir.

»-Pues yo, hermana -replicó Camila-, ¿qué tengo de saber, que no me
atreveré a forjar ni sustentar una mentira, si me fuese en ello la vida? Y
si es que no hemos de saber dar salida a esto, mejor será decirle la verdad
desnuda, que no que nos alcance en mentirosa cuenta.

»-No tengas pena, señora: de aquí a mañana -respondió Leonela- yo pensaré
qué le digamos, y quizá que, por ser la herida donde es, la podrás
encubrir sin que él la vea, y el cielo será servido de favorecer a nuestros
tan justos y tan honrados pensamientos. Sosiégate, señora mía, y procura
sosegar tu alteración, porque mi señor no te halle sobresaltada, y lo demás
déjalo a mi cargo, y al de Dios, que siempre acude a los buenos deseos.
»Atentísimo había estado Anselmo a escuchar y a ver representar la tragedia
de la muerte de su honra; la cual con tan estraños y eficaces afectos la
representaron los personajes della, que pareció que se habían transformado
en la misma verdad de lo que fingían. Deseaba mucho la noche, y el tener
lugar para salir de su casa, y ir a verse con su buen amigo Lotario,
congratulándose con él de la margarita preciosa que había hallado en el
desengaño de la bondad de su esposa. Tuvieron cuidado las dos de darle
lugar y comodidad a que saliese, y él, sin perdella, salió y luego fue a
buscar a Lotario, el cual hallado, no se puede buenamente contar los
abrazos que le dio, las cosas que de su contento le dijo, las alabanzas que
dio a Camila. Todo lo cual escuchó Lotario sin poder dar muestras de alguna
alegría, porque se le representaba a la memoria cuán engañado estaba su
amigo y cuán injustamente él le agraviaba. Y, aunque Anselmo veía que
Lotario no se alegraba, creía ser la causa por haber dejado a Camila herida
y haber él sido la causa; y así, entre otras razones, le dijo que no
tuviese pena del suceso de Camila, porque, sin duda, la herida era ligera,
pues quedaban de concierto de encubrírsela a él; y que, según esto, no
había de qué temer, sino que de allí adelante se gozase y alegrase con él,
pues por su industria y medio él se veía levantado a la más alta felicidad
que acertara desearse, y quería que no fuesen otros sus entretenimientos
que en hacer versos en alabanza de Camila, que la hiciesen eterna en la
memoria de los siglos venideros. Lotario alabó su buena determinación y
dijo que él, por su parte, ayudaría a levantar tan ilustre edificio.
»Con esto quedó Anselmo el hombre más sabrosamente engañado que pudo haber
en el mundo: él mismo llevó por la mano a su casa, creyendo que llevaba el
instrumento de su gloria, toda la perdición de su fama. Recebíale Camila
con rostro, al parecer, torcido, aunque con alma risueña. Duró este engaño
algunos días, hasta que, al cabo de pocos meses, volvió Fortuna su rueda y
salió a plaza la maldad con tanto artificio hasta allí cubierta, y a
Anselmo le costó la vida su impertinente curiosidad.»





Capítulo XXXV. Donde se da fin a la novela del Curioso impertinente


Poco más quedaba por leer de la novela, cuando del caramanchón donde
reposaba don Quijote salió Sancho Panza todo alborotado, diciendo a voces:

-Acudid, señores, presto y socorred a mi señor, que anda envuelto en la más
reñida y trabada batalla que mis ojos han visto. ¡Vive Dios, que ha dado
una cuchillada al gigante enemigo de la señora princesa Micomicona, que le
ha tajado la cabeza, cercen a cercen, como si fuera un nabo!

-¿Qué dices, hermano? -dijo el cura, dejando de leer lo que de la novela
quedaba-. ¿Estáis en vos, Sancho? ¿Cómo diablos puede ser eso que decís,
estando el gigante dos mil leguas de aquí?

En esto, oyeron un gran ruido en el aposento, y que don Quijote decía a
voces:

-¡Tente, ladrón, malandrín, follón, que aquí te tengo, y no te ha de valer
tu cimitarra!

Y parecía que daba grandes cuchilladas por las paredes. Y dijo Sancho:

-No tienen que pararse a escuchar, sino entren a despartir la pelea, o a
ayudar a mi amo; aunque ya no será menester, porque, sin duda alguna, el
gigante está ya muerto, y dando cuenta a Dios de su pasada y mala vida, que
yo vi correr la sangre por el suelo, y la cabeza cortada y caída a un lado,
que es tamaña como un gran cuero de vino.

-Que me maten -dijo a esta sazón el ventero- si don Quijote, o don diablo,
no ha dado alguna cuchillada en alguno de los cueros de vino tinto que a su
cabecera estaban llenos, y el vino derramado debe de ser lo que le parece
sangre a este buen hombre.

Y, con esto, entró en el aposento, y todos tras él, y hallaron a don
Quijote en el más estraño traje del mundo: estaba en camisa, la cual no era
tan cumplida que por delante le acabase de cubrir los muslos, y por detrás
tenía seis dedos menos; las piernas eran muy largas y flacas, llenas de
vello y no nada limpias; tenía en la cabeza un bonetillo colorado,
grasiento, que era del ventero; en el brazo izquierdo tenía revuelta la
manta de la cama, con quien tenía ojeriza Sancho, y él se sabía bien el
porqué; y en la derecha, desenvainada la espada, con la cual daba
cuchilladas a todas partes, diciendo palabras como si verdaderamente
estuviera peleando con algún gigante. Y es lo bueno que no tenía los ojos
abiertos, porque estaba durmiendo y soñando que estaba en batalla con el
gigante; que fue tan intensa la imaginación de la aventura que iba a
fenecer, que le hizo soñar que ya había llegado al reino de Micomicón, y
que ya estaba en la pelea con su enemigo. Y había dado tantas cuchilladas
en los cueros, creyendo que las daba en el gigante, que todo el aposento
estaba lleno de vino; lo cual visto por el ventero, tomó tanto enojo que
arremetió con don Quijote, y a puño cerrado le comenzó a dar tantos golpes
que si Cardenio y el cura no se le quitaran, él acabara la guerra del
gigante; y, con todo aquello, no despertaba el pobre caballero, hasta que
el barbero trujo un gran caldero de agua fría del pozo y se le echó por
todo el cuerpo de golpe, con lo cual despertó don Quijote; mas no con tanto
acuerdo que echase de ver de la manera que estaba.

Dorotea, que vio cuán corta y sotilmente estaba vestido, no quiso entrar a
ver la batalla de su ayudador y de su contrario.

Andaba Sancho buscando la cabeza del gigante por todo el suelo, y, como no
la hallaba, dijo:

-Ya yo sé que todo lo desta casa es encantamento; que la otra vez, en este
mesmo lugar donde ahora me hallo, me dieron muchos mojicones y porrazos,
sin saber quién me los daba, y nunca pude ver a nadie; y ahora no parece
por aquí esta cabeza que vi cortar por mis mismísimos ojos, y la sangre
corría del cuerpo como de una fuente.

-¿Qué sangre ni qué fuente dices, enemigo de Dios y de sus santos? -dijo el
ventero-. ¿No vees, ladrón, que la sangre y la fuente no es otra cosa que
estos cueros que aquí están horadados y el vino tinto que nada en este
aposento, que nadando vea yo el alma en los infiernos de quien los horadó?
-No sé nada -respondió Sancho-; sólo sé que vendré a ser tan desdichado
que, por no hallar esta cabeza, se me ha de deshacer mi condado como la sal
en el agua.

Y estaba peor Sancho despierto que su amo durmiendo: tal le tenían las
promesas que su amo le había hecho. El ventero se desesperaba de ver la
flema del escudero y el maleficio del señor, y juraba que no había de ser
como la vez pasada, que se le fueron sin pagar; y que ahora no le habían de
valer los previlegios de su caballería para dejar de pagar lo uno y lo
otro, aun hasta lo que pudiesen costar las botanas que se habían de echar a
los rotos cueros.

Tenía el cura de las manos a don Quijote, el cual, creyendo que ya había
acabado la aventura, y que se hallaba delante de la princesa Micomicona, se
hincó de rodillas delante del cura, diciendo:

-Bien puede la vuestra grandeza, alta y famosa señora, vivir, de hoy más,
segura que le pueda hacer mal esta mal nacida criatura; y yo también, de
hoy más, soy quito de la palabra que os di, pues, con el ayuda del alto
Dios y con el favor de aquella por quien yo vivo y respiro, tan bien la he
cumplido.

-¿No lo dije yo? -dijo oyendo esto Sancho-. Sí que no estaba yo borracho:
¡mirad si tiene puesto ya en sal mi amo al gigante! ¡Ciertos son los toros:
mi condado está de molde!

¿Quién no había de reír con los disparates de los dos, amo y mozo? Todos
reían sino el ventero, que se daba a Satanás. Pero, en fin, tanto hicieron
el barbero, Cardenio y el cura que, con no poco trabajo, dieron con don
Quijote en la cama, el cual se quedó dormido, con muestras de grandísimo
cansancio. Dejáronle dormir, y saliéronse al portal de la venta a consolar
a Sancho Panza de no haber hallado la cabeza del gigante; aunque más
tuvieron que hacer en aplacar al ventero, que estaba desesperado por la
repentina muerte de sus cueros. Y la ventera decía en voz y en grito:
-En mal punto y en hora menguada entró en mi casa este caballero andante,
que nunca mis ojos le hubieran visto, que tan caro me cuesta. La vez pasada
se fue con el costo de una noche, de cena, cama, paja y cebada, para él y
para su escudero, y un rocín y un jumento, diciendo que era caballero
aventurero (que mala ventura le dé Dios a él y a cuantos aventureros hay en
el mundo) y que por esto no estaba obligado a pagar nada, que así estaba
escrito en los aranceles de la caballería andantesca. Y ahora, por su
respeto, vino estotro señor y me llevó mi cola, y hámela vuelto con más de
dos cuartillos de daño, toda pelada, que no puede servir para lo que la
quiere mi marido. Y, por fin y remate de todo, romperme mis cueros y
derramarme mi vino; que derramada le vea yo su sangre. ¡Pues no se piense;
que, por los huesos de mi padre y por el siglo de mi madre, si no me lo han
de pagar un cuarto sobre otro, o no me llamaría yo como me llamo ni sería
hija de quien soy!

Estas y otras razones tales decía la ventera con grande enojo, y ayudábala
su buena criada Maritornes. La hija callaba, y de cuando en cuando se
sonreía. El cura lo sosegó todo, prometiendo de satisfacerles su pérdida lo
mejor que pudiese, así de los cueros como del vino, y principalmente del
menoscabo de la cola, de quien tanta cuenta hacían. Dorotea consoló a
Sancho Panza diciéndole que cada y cuando que pareciese haber sido verdad
que su amo hubiese descabezado al gigante, le prometía, en viéndose
pacífica en su reino, de darle el mejor condado que en él hubiese.
Consolóse con esto Sancho, y aseguró a la princesa que tuviese por cierto
que él había visto la cabeza del gigante, y que, por más señas, tenía una
barba que le llegaba a la cintura; y que si no parecía, era porque todo
cuanto en aquella casa pasaba era por vía de encantamento, como él lo había
probado otra vez que había posado en ella. Dorotea dijo que así lo creía, y
que no tuviese pena, que todo se haría bien y sucedería a pedir de boca.
Sosegados todos, el cura quiso acabar de leer la novela, porque vio que
faltaba poco. Cardenio, Dorotea y todos los demás le rogaron la acabase.
Él, que a todos quiso dar gusto, y por el que él tenía de leerla, prosiguió
el cuento, que así decía:

«Sucedió, pues, que, por la satisfación que Anselmo tenía de la bondad de
Camila, vivía una vida contenta y descuidada, y Camila, de industria, hacía
mal rostro a Lotario, porque Anselmo entendiese al revés de la voluntad que
le tenía; y, para más confirmación de su hecho, pidió licencia Lotario para
no venir a su casa, pues claramente se mostraba la pesadumbre que con su
vista Camila recebía; mas el engañado Anselmo le dijo que en ninguna manera
tal hiciese. Y, desta manera, por mil maneras era Anselmo el fabricador de
su deshonra, creyendo que lo era de su gusto.

»En esto, el que tenía Leonela de verse cualificada, no de con sus amores,
llegó a tanto que, sin mirar a otra cosa, se iba tras él a suelta rienda,
fiada en que su señora la encubría, y aun la advertía del modo que con poco
recelo pudiese ponerle en ejecución. En fin, una noche sintió Anselmo pasos
en el aposento de Leonela, y, queriendo entrar a ver quién los daba, sintió
que le detenían la puerta, cosa que le puso más voluntad de abrirla; y
tanta fuerza hizo, que la abrió, y entró dentro a tiempo que vio que un
hombre saltaba por la ventana a la calle; y, acudiendo con presteza a
alcanzarle o conocerle, no pudo conseguir lo uno ni lo otro, porque Leonela
se abrazó con él, diciéndole:

»-Sosiégate, señor mío, y no te alborotes, ni sigas al que de aquí saltó;
es cosa mía, y tanto, que es mi esposo.

»No lo quiso creer Anselmo; antes, ciego de enojo, sacó la daga y quiso
herir a Leonela, diciéndole que le dijese la verdad, si no, que la mataría.
Ella, con el miedo, sin saber lo que se decía, le dijo:

»-No me mates, señor, que yo te diré cosas de más importancia de las que
puedes imaginar.

»-Dilas luego -dijo Anselmo-; si no, muerta eres.

»-Por ahora será imposible -dijo Leonela-, según estoy de turbada; déjame
hasta mañana, que entonces sabrás de mí lo que te ha de admirar; y está
seguro que el que saltó por esta ventana es un mancebo desta ciudad, que me
ha dado la mano de ser mi esposo.

»Sosegóse con esto Anselmo y quiso aguardar el término que se le pedía,
porque no pensaba oír cosa que contra Camila fuese, por estar de su bondad
tan satisfecho y seguro; y así, se salió del aposento y dejó encerrada en
él a Leonela, diciéndole que de allí no saldría hasta que le dijese lo que
tenía que decirle.

»Fue luego a ver a Camila y a decirle, como le dijo, todo aquello que con
su doncella le había pasado, y la palabra que le había dado de decirle
grandes cosas y de importancia. Si se turbó Camila o no, no hay para qué
decirlo, porque fue tanto el temor que cobró, creyendo verdaderamente -y
era de creer- que Leonela había de decir a Anselmo todo lo que sabía de su
poca fe, que no tuvo ánimo para esperar si su sospecha salía falsa o no. Y
aquella mesma noche, cuando le pareció que Anselmo dormía, juntó las
mejores joyas que tenía y algunos dineros, y, sin ser de nadie sentida,
salió de casa y se fue a la de Lotario, a quien contó lo que pasaba, y le
pidió que la pusiese en cobro, o que se ausentasen los dos donde de Anselmo
pudiesen estar seguros. La confusión en que Camila puso a Lotario fue tal,
que no le sabía responder palabra, ni menos sabía resolverse en lo que
haría.

»En fin, acordó de llevar a Camila a un monesterio, en quien era priora una
su hermana. Consintió Camila en ello, y, con la presteza que el caso pedía,
la llevó Lotario y la dejó en el monesterio, y él, ansimesmo, se ausentó
luego de la ciudad, sin dar parte a nadie de su ausencia.

»Cuando amaneció, sin echar de ver Anselmo que Camila faltaba de su lado,
con el deseo que tenía de saber lo que Leonela quería decirle, se levantó y
fue adonde la había dejado encerrada. Abrió y entró en el aposento, pero no
halló en él a Leonela: sólo halló puestas unas sábanas añudadas a la
ventana, indicio y señal que por allí se había descolgado e ido. Volvió
luego muy triste a decírselo a Camila, y, no hallándola en la cama ni en
toda la casa, quedó asombrado.Preguntó a los criados de casa por ella, pero
nadie le supo dar razón de lo que pedía.

»Acertó acaso, andando a buscar a Camila, que vio sus cofres abiertos y que
dellos faltaban las más de sus joyas, y con esto acabó de caer en la cuenta
de su desgracia, y en que no era Leonela la causa de su desventura. Y, ansí
como estaba, sin acabarse de vestir, triste y pensativo, fue a dar cuenta
de su desdicha a su amigo Lotario. Mas, cuando no le halló, y sus criados
le dijeron que aquella noche había faltado de casa y había llevado consigo
todos los dineros que tenía, pensó perder el juicio. Y, para acabar de
concluir con todo, volviéndose a su casa, no halló en ella ninguno de
cuantos criados ni criadas tenía, sino la casa desierta y sola.

»No sabía qué pensar, qué decir, ni qué hacer, y poco a poco se le iba
volviendo el juicio. Contemplábase y mirábase en un instante sin mujer, sin
amigo y sin criados; desamparado, a su parecer, del cielo que le cubría, y
sobre todo sin honra, porque en la falta de Camila vio su perdición.

»Resolvióse, en fin, a cabo de una gran pieza, de irse a la aldea de su
amigo, donde había estado cuando dio lugar a que se maquinase toda aquella
desventura. Cerró las puertas de su casa, subió a caballo, y con desmayado
aliento se puso en camino; y, apenas hubo andado la mitad, cuando, acosado
de sus pensamientos, le fue forzoso apearse y arrendar su caballo a un
árbol, a cuyo tronco se dejó caer, dando tiernos y dolorosos suspiros, y
allí se estuvo hasta casi que anochecía; y aquella hora vio que venía un
hombre a caballo de la ciudad, y, después de haberle saludado, le preguntó
qué nuevas había en Florencia. El ciudadano respondió:

»-Las más estrañas que muchos días ha se han oído en ella; porque se dice
públicamente que Lotario, aquel grande amigo de Anselmo el rico, que vivía
a San Juan, se llevó esta noche a Camila, mujer de Anselmo, el cual tampoco
parece. Todo esto ha dicho una criada de Camila, que anoche la halló el
gobernador descolgándose con una sábana por las ventanas de la casa de
Anselmo. En efeto, no sé puntualmente cómo pasó el negocio; sólo sé que
toda la ciudad está admirada deste suceso, porque no se podía esperar tal
hecho de la mucha y familiar amistad de los dos, que dicen que era tanta,
que los llamaban los dos amigos.

»-¿Sábese, por ventura -dijo Anselmo-, el camino que llevan Lotario y
Camila?

»-Ni por pienso -dijo el ciudadano-, puesto que el gobernador ha usado de
mucha diligencia en buscarlos

»-A Dios vais, señor -dijo Anselmo.

»-Con Él quedéis -respondió el ciudadano, y fuese.

»Con tan desdichadas nuevas, casi casi llegó a términos Anselmo, no sólo de
perder el juicio, sino de acabar la vida. Levantóse como pudo y llegó a
casa de su amigo, que aún no sabía su desgracia; mas, como le vio llegar
amarillo, consumido y seco, entendió que de algún grave mal venía fatigado.
Pidió luego Anselmo que le acostasen, y que le diesen aderezo de escribir.
Hízose así, y dejáronle acostado y solo, porque él así lo quiso, y aun que
le cerrasen la puerta. Viéndose, pues, solo, comenzó a cargar tanto la
imaginación de su desventura, que claramente conoció que se le iba acabando
la vida; y así, ordenó de dejar noticia de la causa de su estraña muerte;
y, comenzando a escribir, antes que acabase de poner todo lo que quería, le
faltó el aliento y dejó la vida en las manos del dolor que le causó su
curiosidad impertinente.

»Viendo el señor de casa que era ya tarde y que Anselmo no llamaba, acordó
de entrar a saber si pasaba adelante su indisposición, y hallóle tendido
boca abajo, la mitad del cuerpo en la cama y la otra mitad sobre el bufete,
sobre el cual estaba con el papel escrito y abierto, y él tenía aún la
pluma en la mano. Llegóse el huésped a él, habiéndole llamado primero; y,
trabándole por la mano, viendo que no le respondía y hallándole frío, vio
que estaba muerto. Admiróse y congojóse en gran manera, y llamó a la gente
de casa para que viesen la desgracia a Anselmo sucedida; y, finalmente,
leyó el papel, que conoció que de su mesma mano estaba escrito, el cual
contenía estas razones:

Un necio e impertinente deseo me quitó la vida. Si las nuevas de mi muerte
llegaren a los oídos de Camila, sepa que yo la perdono, porque no estaba
ella obligada a hacer milagros, ni yo tenía necesidad de querer que ella
los hiciese; y, pues yo fui el fabricador de mi deshonra, no hay para
qué...

»Hasta aquí escribió Anselmo, por donde se echó de ver que en aquel punto,
sin poder acabar la razón, se le acabó la vida. Otro día dio aviso su amigo
a los parientes de Anselmo de su muerte, los cuales ya sabían su desgracia,
y el monesterio donde Camila estaba, casi en el término de acompañar a su
esposo en aquel forzoso viaje, no por las nuevas del muerto esposo, mas por
las que supo del ausente amigo. Dícese que, aunque se vio viuda, no quiso
salir del monesterio, ni, menos, hacer profesión de monja, hasta que, no de
allí a muchos días, le vinieron nuevas que Lotario había muerto en una
batalla que en aquel tiempo dio monsiur de Lautrec al Gran Capitán Gonzalo
Fernández de Córdoba en el reino de Nápoles, donde había ido a parar el
tarde arrepentido amigo; lo cual sabido por Camila, hizo profesión, y acabó
en breves días la vida a las rigurosas manos de tristezas y melancolías.
Éste fue el fin que tuvieron todos, nacido de un tan desatinado principio.»

-Bien -dijo el cura- me parece esta novela, pero no me puedo persuadir que
esto sea verdad; y si es fingido, fingió mal el autor, porque no se puede
imaginar que haya marido tan necio que quiera hacer tan costosa experiencia
como Anselmo. Si este caso se pusiera entre un galán y una dama, pudiérase
llevar, pero entre marido y mujer, algo tiene del imposible; y, en lo que
toca al modo de contarle, no me descontenta.





Capítulo XXXVI. Que trata de la brava y descomunal batalla que don Quijote
tuvo con unos cueros de vino tinto, con otros raros sucesos que en la venta
le sucedieron


Estando en esto, el ventero, que estaba a la puerta de la venta, dijo:

-Esta que viene es una hermosa tropa de huéspedes: si ellos paran aquí,
gaudeamus tenemos.

-¿Qué gente es? -dijo Cardenio.

-Cuatro hombres -respondió el ventero- vienen a caballo, a la jineta, con
lanzas y adargas, y todos con antifaces negros; y junto con ellos viene una
mujer vestida de blanco, en un sillón, ansimesmo cubierto el rostro, y
otros dos mozos de a pie.

-¿Vienen muy cerca? -preguntó el cura.

-Tan cerca -respondió el ventero-, que ya llegan.

Oyendo esto Dorotea, se cubrió el rostro, y Cardenio se entró en el
aposento de don Quijote; y casi no habían tenido lugar para esto, cuando
entraron en la venta todos los que el ventero había dicho; y, apeándose los
cuatro de a caballo, que de muy gentil talle y disposición eran, fueron a
apear a la mujer que en el sillón venía; y, tomándola uno dellos en sus
brazos, la sentó en una silla que estaba a la entrada del aposento donde
Cardenio se había escondido. En todo este tiempo, ni ella ni ellos se
habían quitado los antifaces, ni hablado palabra alguna; sólo que, al
sentarse la mujer en la silla, dio un profundo suspiro y dejó caer los
brazos, como persona enferma y desmayada. Los mozos de a pie llevaron los
caballos a la caballeriza.

Viendo esto el cura, deseoso de saber qué gente era aquella que con tal
traje y tal silencio estaba, se fue donde estaban los mozos, y a uno dellos
le preguntó lo que ya deseaba; el cual le respondió:

-Pardiez, señor, yo no sabré deciros qué gente sea ésta; sólo sé que
muestra ser muy principal, especialmente aquel que llegó a tomar en sus
brazos a aquella señora que habéis visto; y esto dígolo porque todos los
demás le tienen respeto, y no se hace otra cosa más de la que él ordena y
manda.

-Y la señora, ¿quién es? -preguntó el cura.

-Tampoco sabré decir eso -respondió el mozo-, porque en todo el camino no
la he visto el rostro; suspirar sí la he oído muchas veces, y dar unos
gemidos que parece que con cada uno dellos quiere dar el alma. Y no es de
maravillar que no sepamos más de lo que habemos dicho, porque mi compañero
y yo no ha más de dos días que los acompañamos; porque, habiéndolos
encontrado en el camino, nos rogaron y persuadieron que viniésemos con
ellos hasta el Andalucía, ofreciéndose a pagárnoslo muy bien.

-¿Y habéis oído nombrar a alguno dellos? -preguntó el cura.

-No, por cierto -respondió el mozo-, porque todos caminan con tanto
silencio que es maravilla, porque no se oye entre ellos otra cosa que los
suspiros y sollozos de la pobre señora, que nos mueven a lástima; y sin
duda tenemos creído que ella va forzada dondequiera que va, y, según se
puede colegir por su hábito, ella es monja, o va a serlo, que es lo más
cierto, y quizá porque no le debe de nacer de voluntad el monjío, va
triste, como parece.

-Todo podría ser -dijo el cura.

Y, dejándolos, se volvió adonde estaba Dorotea, la cual, como había oído
suspirar a la embozada, movida de natural compasión, se llegó a ella y le
dijo:

-¿Qué mal sentís, señora mía? Mirad si es alguno de quien las mujeres
suelen tener uso y experiencia de curarle, que de mi parte os ofrezco una
buena voluntad de serviros.

A todo esto callaba la lastimada señora; y, aunque Dorotea tornó con
mayores ofrecimientos, todavía se estaba en su silencio, hasta que llegó el
caballero embozado que dijo el mozo que los demás obedecían, y dijo a
Dorotea:

-No os canséis, señora, en ofrecer nada a esa mujer, porque tiene por
costumbre de no agradecer cosa que por ella se hace, ni procuréis que os
responda, si no queréis oír alguna mentira de su boca.

-Jamás la dije -dijo a esta sazón la que hasta allí había estado callando-;
antes, por ser tan verdadera y tan sin trazas mentirosas, me veo ahora en
tanta desventura; y desto vos mesmo quiero que seáis el testigo, pues mi
pura verdad os hace a vos ser falso y mentiroso.

Oyó estas razones Cardenio bien clara y distintamente, como quien estaba
tan junto de quien las decía que sola la puerta del aposento de don Quijote
estaba en medio; y, así como las oyó, dando una gran voz dijo:

-¡Válgame Dios! ¿Qué es esto que oigo? ¿Qué voz es esta que ha llegado a
mis oídos?

Volvió la cabeza a estos gritos aquella señora, toda sobresaltada, y, no
viendo quién las daba, se levantó en pie y fuese a entrar en el aposento;
lo cual visto por el caballero, la detuvo, sin dejarla mover un paso. A
ella, con la turbación y desasosiego, se le cayó el tafetán con que traía
cubierto el rostro, y descubrió una hermosura incomparable y un rostro
milagroso, aunque descolorido y asombrado, porque con los ojos andaba
rodeando todos los lugares donde alcanzaba con la vista, con tanto ahínco,
que parecía persona fuera de juicio; cuyas señales, sin saber por qué las
hacía, pusieron gran lástima en Dorotea y en cuantos la miraban. Teníala el
caballero fuertemente asida por las espaldas, y, por estar tan ocupado en
tenerla, no pudo acudir a alzarse el embozo, que se le caía, como, en
efeto, se le cayó del todo; y, alzando los ojos Dorotea, que abrazada con
la señora estaba, vio que el que abrazada ansimesmo la tenía era su esposo
don Fernando; y, apenas le hubo conocido, cuando, arrojando de lo íntimo de
sus entrañas un luengo y tristísimo ''¡ay!'', se dejó caer de espaldas
desmayada; y, a no hallarse allí junto el barbero, que la recogió en los
brazos, ella diera consigo en el suelo.

Acudió luego el cura a quitarle el embozo, para echarle agua en el rostro,
y así como la descubrió la conoció don Fernando, que era el que estaba
abrazado con la otra, y quedó como muerto en verla; pero no porque dejase,
con todo esto, de tener a Luscinda, que era la que procuraba soltarse de
sus brazos; la cual había conocido en el suspiro a Cardenio, y él la había
conocido a ella. Oyó asimesmo Cardenio el ¡ay! que dio Dorotea cuando se
cayó desmayada, y, creyendo que era su Luscinda, salió del aposento
despavorido, y lo primero que vio fue a don Fernando, que tenía abrazada a
Luscinda. También don Fernando conoció luego a Cardenio; y todos tres,
Luscinda, Cardenio y Dorotea, quedaron mudos y suspensos, casi sin saber lo
que les había acontecido.

Callaban todos y mirábanse todos: Dorotea a don Fernando, don Fernando a
Cardenio, Cardenio a Luscinda y Luscinda a Cardenio. Mas quien primero
rompió el silencio fue Luscinda, hablando a don Fernando desta manera:

-Dejadme, señor don Fernando, por lo que debéis a ser quien sois, ya que
por otro respeto no lo hagáis; dejadme llegar al muro de quien yo soy
yedra, al arrimo de quien no me han podido apartar vuestras
importunaciones, vuestras amenazas, vuestras promesas ni vuestras dádivas.
Notad cómo el cielo, por desusados y a nosotros encubiertos caminos, me ha
puesto a mi verdadero esposo delante. Y bien sabéis por mil costosas
experiencias que sola la muerte fuera bastante para borrarle de mi memoria.
Sean, pues, parte tan claros desengaños para que volváis, ya que no podáis
hacer otra cosa, el amor en rabia, la voluntad en despecho, y acabadme con
él la vida; que, como yo la rinda delante de mi buen esposo, la daré por
bien empleada: quizá con mi muerte quedará satisfecho de la fe que le
mantuve hasta el último trance de la vida.

Había en este entretanto vuelto Dorotea en sí, y había estado escuchando
todas las razones que Luscinda dijo, por las cuales vino en conocimiento de
quién ella era; que, viendo que don Fernando aún no la dejaba de los
brazos, ni respondía a sus razones, esforzándose lo más que pudo, se
levantó y se fue a hincar de rodillas a sus pies; y, derramando mucha
cantidad de hermosas y lastimeras lágrimas, así le comenzó a decir:

-Si ya no es, señor mío, que los rayos deste sol que en tus brazos
eclipsado tienes te quitan y ofuscan los de tus ojos, ya habrás echado de
ver que la que a tus pies está arrodillada es la sin ventura, hasta que tú
quieras, y la desdichada Dorotea. Yo soy aquella labradora humilde a quien
tú, por tu bondad o por tu gusto, quisiste levantar a la alteza de poder
llamarse tuya. Soy la que, encerrada en los límites de la honestidad, vivió
vida contenta hasta que, a las voces de tus importunidades, y, al parecer,
justos y amorosos sentimientos, abrió las puertas de su recato y te entregó
las llaves de su libertad: dádiva de ti tan mal agradecida, cual lo muestra
bien claro haber sido forzoso hallarme en el lugar donde me hallas, y verte
yo a ti de la manera que te veo. Pero, con todo esto, no querría que cayese
en tu imaginación pensar que he venido aquí con pasos de mi deshonra,
habiéndome traído sólo los del dolor y sentimiento de verme de ti olvidada.
Tú quisiste que yo fuese tuya, y quisístelo de manera que, aunque ahora
quieras que no lo sea, no será posible que tú dejes de ser mío. Mira, señor
mío, que puede ser recompensa a la hermosura y nobleza por quien me dejas
la incomparable voluntad que te tengo. Tú no puedes ser de la hermosa
Luscinda, porque eres mío, ni ella puede ser tuya, porque es de Cardenio; y
más fácil te será, si en ello miras, reducir tu voluntad a querer a quien
te adora, que no encaminar la que te aborrece a que bien te quiera. Tú
solicitaste mi descuido, tú rogaste a mi entereza, tú no ignoraste mi
calidad, tú sabes bien de la manera que me entregué a toda tu voluntad: no
te queda lugar ni acogida de llamarte a engaño. Y si esto es así, como lo
es, y tú eres tan cristiano como caballero, ¿por qué por tantos rodeos
dilatas de hacerme venturosa en los fines, como me heciste en los
principios? Y si no me quieres por la que soy, que soy tu verdadera y
legítima esposa, quiéreme, a lo menos, y admíteme por tu esclava; que, como
yo esté en tu poder, me tendré por dichosa y bien afortunada. No permitas,
con dejarme y desampararme, que se hagan y junten corrillos en mi deshonra;
no des tan mala vejez a mis padres, pues no lo merecen los leales servicios
que, como buenos vasallos, a los tuyos siempre han hecho. Y si te parece
que has de aniquilar tu sangre por mezclarla con la mía, considera que
pocas o ninguna nobleza hay en el mundo que no haya corrido por este
camino, y que la que se toma de las mujeres no es la que hace al caso en
las ilustres decendencias; cuanto más, que la verdadera nobleza consiste en
la virtud, y si ésta a ti te falta, negándome lo que tan justamente me
debes, yo quedaré con más ventajas de noble que las que tú tienes. En fin,
señor, lo que últimamente te digo es que, quieras o no quieras, yo soy tu
esposa: testigos son tus palabras, que no han ni deben ser mentirosas, si
ya es que te precias de aquello por que me desprecias; testigo será la
firma que hiciste, y testigo el cielo, a quien tú llamaste por testigo de
lo que me prometías. Y, cuando todo esto falte, tu misma conciencia no ha
de faltar de dar voces callando en mitad de tus alegrías, volviendo por
esta verdad que te he dicho y turbando tus mejores gustos y contentos.

Estas y otras razones dijo la lastimada Dorotea, con tanto sentimiento y
lágrimas, que los mismos que acompañaban a don Fernando, y cuantos
presentes estaban, la acompañaron en ellas. Escuchóla don Fernando sin
replicalle palabra, hasta que ella dio fin a las suyas y principio a tantos
sollozos y suspiros, que bien había de ser corazón de bronce el que con
muestras de tanto dolor no se enterneciera. Mirándola estaba Luscinda, no
menos lastimada de su sentimiento que admirada de su mucha discreción y
hermosura; y, aunque quisiera llegarse a ella y decirle algunas palabras de
consuelo, no la dejaban los brazos de don Fernando, que apretada la tenían.
El cual, lleno de confusión y espanto, al cabo de un buen espacio que
atentamente estuvo mirando a Dorotea, abrió los brazos y, dejando libre a
Luscinda, dijo:

-Venciste, hermosa Dorotea, venciste; porque no es posible tener ánimo para
negar tantas verdades juntas.

Con el desmayo que Luscinda había tenido, así como la dejó don Fernando,
iba a caer en el suelo; mas, hallándose Cardenio allí junto, que a las
espaldas de don Fernando se había puesto porque no le conociese,
prosupuesto todo temor y aventurando a todo riesgo, acudió a sostener a
Luscinda, y, cogiéndola entre sus brazos, le dijo:

-Si el piadoso cielo gusta y quiere que ya tengas algún descanso, leal,
firme y hermosa señora mía, en ninguna parte creo yo que le tendrás más
seguro que en estos brazos que ahora te reciben, y otro tiempo te
recibieron, cuando la fortuna quiso que pudiese llamarte mía.

A estas razones, puso Luscinda en Cardenio los ojos, y, habiendo comenzado
a conocerle, primero por la voz, y asegurándose que él era con la vista,
casi fuera de sentido y sin tener cuenta a ningún honesto respeto, le echó
los brazos al cuello, y, juntando su rostro con el de Cardenio, le dijo:

-Vos sí, señor mío, sois el verdadero dueño desta vuestra captiva, aunque
más lo impida la contraria suerte, y, aunque más amenazas le hagan a esta
vida que en la vuestra se sustenta.

Estraño espectáculo fue éste para don Fernando y para todos los
circunstantes, admirándose de tan no visto suceso. Parecióle a Dorotea que
don Fernando había perdido la color del rostro y que hacía ademán de querer
vengarse de Cardenio, porque le vio encaminar la mano a ponella en la
espada; y, así como lo pensó, con no vista presteza se abrazó con él por
las rodillas, besándoselas y teniéndole apretado, que no le dejaba mover,
y, sin cesar un punto de sus lágrimas, le decía:

-¿Qué es lo que piensas hacer, único refugio mío, en este tan impensado
trance? Tú tienes a tus pies a tu esposa, y la que quieres que lo sea está
en los brazos de su marido. Mira si te estará bien o te será posible
deshacer lo que el cielo ha hecho, o si te convendrá querer levantar a
igualar a ti mismo a la que, pospuesto todo inconveniente, confirmada en su
verdad y firmeza, delante de tus ojos tiene los suyos, bañados de licor
amoroso el rostro y pecho de su verdadero esposo. Por quien Dios es te
ruego, y por quien tú eres te suplico, que este tan notorio desengaño no
sólo no acreciente tu ira, sino que la mengüe en tal manera, que con
quietud y sosiego permitas que estos dos amantes le tengan, sin
impedimiento tuyo, todo el tiempo que el cielo quisiere concedérsele; y en
esto mostrarás la generosidad de tu ilustre y noble pecho, y verá el mundo
que tiene contigo más fuerza la razón que el apetito.

En tanto que esto decía Dorotea, aunque Cardenio tenía abrazada a Luscinda,
no quitaba los ojos de don Fernando, con determinación de que, si le viese
hacer algún movimiento en su perjuicio, procurar defenderse y ofender como
mejor pudiese a todos aquellos que en su daño se mostrasen, aunque le
costase la vida. Pero a esta sazón acudieron los amigos de don Fernando, y
el cura y el barbero, que a todo habían estado presentes, sin que faltase
el bueno de Sancho Panza, y todos rodeaban a don Fernando, suplicándole
tuviese por bien de mirar las lágrimas de Dorotea; y que, siendo verdad,
como sin duda ellos creían que lo era, lo que en sus razones había dicho,
que no permitiese quedase defraudada de sus tan justas esperanzas. Que
considerase que, no acaso, como parecía, sino con particular providencia
del cielo, se habían todos juntado en lugar donde menos ninguno pensaba; y
que advirtiese -dijo el cura- que sola la muerte podía apartar a Luscinda
de Cardenio; y, aunque los dividiesen filos de alguna espada, ellos
tendrían por felicísima su muerte; y que en los lazos inremediables era
suma cordura, forzándose y venciéndose a sí mismo, mostrar un generoso
pecho, permitiendo que por sola su voluntad los dos gozasen el bien que el
cielo ya les había concedido; que pusiese los ojos ansimesmo en la beldad
de Dorotea, y vería que pocas o ninguna se le podían igualar, cuanto más
hacerle ventaja, y que juntase a su hermosura su humildad y el estremo del
amor que le tenía; y, sobre todo, advirtiese que si se preciaba de
caballero y de cristiano, que no podía hacer otra cosa que cumplille la
palabra dada, y que, cumpliéndosela, cumpliría con Dios y satisfaría a las
gentes discretas, las cuales saben y conocen que es prerrogativa de la
hermosura, aunque esté en sujeto humilde, como se acompañe con la
honestidad, poder levantarse e igualarse a cualquiera alteza, sin nota de
menoscabo del que la levanta e iguala a sí mismo; y, cuando se cumplen las
fuertes leyes del gusto, como en ello no intervenga pecado, no debe de ser
culpado el que las sigue.

En efeto, a estas razones añadieron todos otras, tales y tantas, que el
valeroso pecho de don Fernando (en fin, como alimentado con ilustre sangre)
se ablandó y se dejó vencer de la verdad, que él no pudiera negar aunque
quisiera; y la señal que dio de haberse rendido y entregado al buen parecer
que se le había propuesto fue abajarse y abrazar a Dorotea, diciéndole:

-Levantaos, señora mía, que no es justo que esté arrodillada a mis pies la
que yo tengo en mi alma; y si hasta aquí no he dado muestras de lo que
digo, quizá ha sido por orden del cielo, para que, viendo yo en vos la fe
con que me amáis, os sepa estimar en lo que merecéis. Lo que os ruego es
que no me reprehendáis mi mal término y mi mucho descuido, pues la misma
ocasión y fuerza que me movió para acetaros por mía, esa misma me impelió
para procurar no ser vuestro. Y que esto sea verdad, volved y mirad los
ojos de la ya contenta Luscinda, y en ellos hallaréis disculpa de todos mis
yerros; y, pues ella halló y alcanzó lo que deseaba, y yo he hallado en vos
lo que me cumple, viva ella segura y contenta luengos y felices años con su
Cardenio, que yo rogaré al cielo que me los deje vivir con mi Dorotea.

Y, diciendo esto, la tornó a abrazar y a juntar su rostro con el suyo, con
tan tierno sentimiento, que le fue necesario tener gran cuenta con que las
lágrimas no acabasen de dar indubitables señas de su amor y
arrepentimiento. No lo hicieron así las de Luscinda y Cardenio, y aun las
de casi todos los que allí presentes estaban, porque comenzaron a derramar
tantas, los unos de contento proprio y los otros del ajeno, que no parecía
sino que algún grave y mal caso a todos había sucedido. Hasta Sancho Panza
lloraba, aunque después dijo que no lloraba él sino por ver que Dorotea no
era, como él pensaba, la reina Micomicona, de quien él tantas mercedes
esperaba. Duró algún espacio, junto con el llanto, la admiración en todos,
y luego Cardenio y Luscinda se fueron a poner de rodillas ante don
Fernando, dándole gracias de la merced que les había hecho con tan corteses
razones, que don Fernando no sabía qué responderles; y así, los levantó y
abrazó con muestras de mucho amor y de mucha cortesía.

Preguntó luego a Dorotea le dijese cómo había venido a aquel lugar tan
lejos del suyo. Ella, con breves y discretas razones, contó todo lo que
antes había contado a Cardenio, de lo cual gustó tanto don Fernando y los
que con él venían, que quisieran que durara el cuento más tiempo: tanta era
la gracia con que Dorotea contaba sus desventuras. Y, así como hubo
acabado, dijo don Fernando lo que en la ciudad le había acontecido después
que halló el papel en el seno de Luscinda, donde declaraba ser esposa de
Cardenio y no poderlo ser suya. Dijo que la quiso matar, y lo hiciera si de
sus padres no fuera impedido; y que así, se salió de su casa, despechado y
corrido, con determinación de vengarse con más comodidad; y que otro día
supo como Luscinda había faltado de casa de sus padres, sin que nadie
supiese decir dónde se había ido, y que, en resolución, al cabo de algunos
meses vino a saber como estaba en un monesterio, con voluntad de quedarse
en él toda la vida, si no la pudiese pasar con Cardenio; y que, así como lo
supo, escogiendo para su compañía aquellos tres caballeros, vino al lugar
donde estaba, a la cual no había querido hablar, temeroso que, en sabiendo
que él estaba allí, había de haber más guarda en el monesterio; y así,
aguardando un día a que la portería estuviese abierta, dejó a los dos a la
guarda de la puerta, y él, con otro, habían entrado en el monesterio
buscando a Luscinda, la cual hallaron en el claustro hablando con una
monja; y, arrebatándola, sin darle lugar a otra cosa, se habían venido con
ella a un lugar donde se acomodaron de aquello que hubieron menester para
traella. Todo lo cual habían podido hacer bien a su salvo, por estar el
monesterio en el campo, buen trecho fuera del pueblo. Dijo que, así como
Luscinda se vio en su poder, perdió todos los sentidos; y que, después de
vuelta en sí, no había hecho otra cosa sino llorar y suspirar, sin hablar
palabra alguna; y que así, acompañados de silencio y de lágrimas, habían
llegado a aquella venta, que para él era haber llegado al cielo, donde se
rematan y tienen fin todas las desventuras de la tierra.





Capítulo XXXVII. Que prosigue la historia de la famosa infanta Micomicona,
con otras graciosas aventuras


Todo esto escuchaba Sancho, no con poco dolor de su ánima, viendo que se
le desparecían e iban en humo las esperanzas de su ditado, y que la linda
princesa Micomicona se le había vuelto en Dorotea, y el gigante en don
Fernando, y su amo se estaba durmiendo a sueño suelto, bien descuidado de
todo lo sucedido. No se podía asegurar Dorotea si era soñado el bien que
poseía. Cardenio estaba en el mismo pensamiento, y el de Luscinda corría
por la misma cuenta. Don Fernando daba gracias al cielo por la merced
recebida y haberle sacado de aquel intricado laberinto, donde se hallaba
tan a pique de perder el crédito y el alma; y, finalmente, cuantos en la
venta estaban, estaban contentos y gozosos del buen suceso que habían
tenido tan trabados y desesperados negocios.

Todo lo ponía en su punto el cura, como discreto, y a cada uno daba el
parabién del bien alcanzado; pero quien más jubilaba y se contentaba era la
ventera, por la promesa que Cardenio y el cura le habían hecho de pagalle
todos los daños e intereses que por cuenta de don Quijote le hubiesen
venido. Sólo Sancho, como ya se ha dicho, era el afligido, el desventurado
y el triste; y así, con malencónico semblante, entró a su amo, el cual
acababa de despertar, a quien dijo:

-Bien puede vuestra merced, señor Triste Figura, dormir todo lo que
quisiere, sin cuidado de matar a ningún gigante, ni de volver a la princesa
su reino: que ya todo está hecho y concluido.

-Eso creo yo bien -respondió don Quijote-, porque he tenido con el gigante
la más descomunal y desaforada batalla que pienso tener en todos los días
de mi vida; y de un revés, ¡zas!, le derribé la cabeza en el suelo, y fue
tanta la sangre que le salió, que los arroyos corrían por la tierra como si
fueran de agua.

-Como si fueran de vino tinto, pudiera vuestra merced decir mejor
-respondió Sancho-, porque quiero que sepa vuestra merced, si es que no lo
sabe, que el gigante muerto es un cuero horadado, y la sangre, seis arrobas
de vino tinto que encerraba en su vientre; y la cabeza cortada es la puta
que me parió, y llévelo todo Satanás.

-Y ¿qué es lo que dices, loco? -replicó don Quijote-. ¿Estás en tu seso?

-Levántese vuestra merced -dijo Sancho-, y verá el buen recado que ha
hecho, y lo que tenemos que pagar; y verá a la reina convertida en una dama
particular, llamada Dorotea, con otros sucesos que, si cae en ellos, le han
de admirar.

-No me maravillaría de nada deso -replicó don Quijote-, porque, si bien te
acuerdas, la otra vez que aquí estuvimos te dije yo que todo cuanto aquí
sucedía eran cosas de encantamento, y no sería mucho que ahora fuese lo
mesmo.

-Todo lo creyera yo -respondió Sancho-, si también mi manteamiento fuera
cosa dese jaez, mas no lo fue, sino real y verdaderamente; y vi yo que el
ventero que aquí está hoy día tenía del un cabo de la manta, y me empujaba
hacia el cielo con mucho donaire y brío, y con tanta risa como fuerza; y
donde interviene conocerse las personas, tengo para mí, aunque simple y
pecador, que no hay encantamento alguno, sino mucho molimiento y mucha mala
ventura.

-Ahora bien, Dios lo remediará -dijo don Quijote-. Dame de vestir y déjame
salir allá fuera, que quiero ver los sucesos y transformaciones que dices.

Diole de vestir Sancho, y, en el entretanto que se vestía, contó el cura a
don Fernando y a los demás las locuras de don Quijote, y del artificio que
habían usado para sacarle de la Peña Pobre, donde él se imaginaba estar por
desdenes de su señora. Contóles asimismo casi todas las aventuras que
Sancho había contado, de que no poco se admiraron y rieron, por parecerles
lo que a todos parecía: ser el más estraño género de locura que podía caber
en pensamiento desparatado. Dijo más el cura: que, pues ya el buen suceso
de la señora Dorotea impidía pasar con su disignio adelante, que era
menester inventar y hallar otro para poderle llevar a su tierra. Ofrecióse
Cardenio de proseguir lo comenzado, y que Luscinda haría y representaría la
persona de Dorotea.

-No -dijo don Fernando-, no ha de ser así: que yo quiero que Dorotea
prosiga su invención; que, como no sea muy lejos de aquí el lugar deste
buen caballero, yo holgaré de que se procure su remedio.

-No está más de dos jornadas de aquí.

-Pues, aunque estuviera más, gustara yo de caminallas, a trueco de hacer
tan buena obra.

Salió, en esto, don Quijote, armado de todos sus pertrechos, con el yelmo,
aunque abollado, de Mambrino en la cabeza, embrazado de su rodela y
arrimado a su tronco o lanzón. Suspendió a don Fernando y a los demás la
estraña presencia de don Quijote, viendo su rostro de media legua de
andadura, seco y amarillo, la desigualdad de sus armas y su mesurado
continente, y estuvieron callando hasta ver lo que él decía, el cual, con
mucha gravedad y reposo, puestos los ojos en la hermosa Dorotea, dijo:

-Estoy informado, hermosa señora, deste mi escudero que la vuestra grandeza
se ha aniquilado, y vuestro ser se ha deshecho, porque de reina y gran
señora que solíades ser os habéis vuelto en una particular doncella. Si
esto ha sido por orden del rey nigromante de vuestro padre, temeroso que yo
no os diese la necesaria y debida ayuda, digo que no supo ni sabe de la
misa la media, y que fue poco versado en las historias caballerescas,
porque si él las hubiera leído y pasado tan atentamente y con tanto espacio
como yo las pasé y leí, hallara a cada paso cómo otros caballeros de menor
fama que la mía habían acabado cosas más dificultosas, no siéndolo mucho
matar a un gigantillo, por arrogante que sea; porque no ha muchas horas que
yo me vi con él, y... quiero callar, porque no me digan que miento; pero el
tiempo, descubridor de todas las cosas, lo dirá cuando menos lo pensemos.

-Vístesos vos con dos cueros, que no con un gigante -dijo a esta sazón el
ventero.

Al cual mandó don Fernando que callase y no interrumpiese la plática de don
Quijote en ninguna manera; y don Quijote prosiguió diciendo:

-Digo, en fin, alta y desheredada señora, que si por la causa que he dicho
vuestro padre ha hecho este metamorfóseos en vuestra persona, que no le
deis crédito alguno, porque no hay ningún peligro en la tierra por quien no
se abra camino mi espada, con la cual, poniendo la cabeza de vuestro
enemigo en tierra, os pondré a vos la corona de la vuestra en la cabeza en
breves días.

No dijo más don Quijote, y esperó a que la princesa le respondiese, la
cual, como ya sabía la determinación de don Fernando de que se prosiguiese
adelante en el engaño hasta llevar a su tierra a don Quijote, con mucho
donaire y gravedad, le respondió:

-Quienquiera que os dijo, valeroso caballero de la Triste Figura, que yo me
había mudado y trocado de mi ser, no os dijo lo cierto, porque la misma que
ayer fui me soy hoy. Verdad es que alguna mudanza han hecho en mí ciertos
acaecimientos de buena ventura, que me la han dado la mejor que yo pudiera
desearme, pero no por eso he dejado de ser la que antes y de tener los
mesmos pensamientos de valerme del valor de vuestro valeroso e invenerable
brazo que siempre he tenido. Así que, señor mío, vuestra bondad vuelva la
honra al padre que me engendró, y téngale por hombre advertido y prudente,
pues con su ciencia halló camino tan fácil y tan verdadero para remediar mi
desgracia; que yo creo que si por vos, señor, no fuera, jamás acertara a
tener la ventura que tengo; y en esto digo tanta verdad como son buenos
testigos della los más destos señores que están presentes. Lo que resta es
que mañana nos pongamos en camino, porque ya hoy se podrá hacer poca
jornada, y en lo demás del buen suceso que espero, lo dejaré a Dios y al
valor de vuestro pecho.

Esto dijo la discreta Dorotea, y, en oyéndolo don Quijote, se volvió a
Sancho, y, con muestras de mucho enojo, le dijo:

-Ahora te digo, Sanchuelo, que eres el mayor bellacuelo que hay en España.
Dime, ladrón vagamundo, ¿no me acabaste de decir ahora que esta princesa se
había vuelto en una doncella que se llamaba Dorotea, y que la cabeza que
entiendo que corté a un gigante era la puta que te parió, con otros
disparates que me pusieron en la mayor confusión que jamás he estado en
todos los días de mi vida? ¡Voto... -y miró al cielo y apretó los dientes-
que estoy por hacer un estrago en ti, que ponga sal en la mollera a todos
cuantos mentirosos escuderos hubiere de caballeros andantes, de aquí
adelante, en el mundo!

-Vuestra merced se sosiegue, señor mío -respondió Sancho-, que bien podría
ser que yo me hubiese engañado en lo que toca a la mutación de la señora
princesa Micomicona; pero, en lo que toca a la cabeza del gigante, o, a lo
menos, a la horadación de los cueros y a lo de ser vino tinto la sangre, no
me engaño, ¡vive Dios!, porque los cueros allí están heridos, a la cabecera
del lecho de vuestra merced, y el vino tinto tiene hecho un lago el
aposento; y si no, al freír de los huevos lo verá; quiero decir que lo verá
cuando aquí su merced del señor ventero le pida el menoscabo de todo. De lo
demás, de que la señora reina se esté como se estaba, me regocijo en el
alma, porque me va mi parte, como a cada hijo de vecino.

-Ahora yo te digo, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que eres un mentecato; y
perdóname, y basta.

-Basta -dijo don Fernando-, y no se hable más en esto; y, pues la señora
princesa dice que se camine mañana, porque ya hoy es tarde, hágase así, y
esta noche la podremos pasar en buena conversación hasta el venidero día,
donde todos acompañaremos al señor don Quijote, porque queremos ser
testigos de las valerosas e inauditas hazañas que ha de hacer en el
discurso desta grande empresa que a su cargo lleva.

-Yo soy el que tengo de serviros y acompañaros -respondió don Quijote-, y
agradezco mucho la merced que se me hace y la buena opinión que de mí se
tiene, la cual procuraré que salga verdadera, o me costará la vida, y aun
más, si más costarme puede.

Muchas palabras de comedimiento y muchos ofrecimientos pasaron entre don
Quijote y don Fernando; pero a todo puso silencio un pasajero que en
aquella sazón entró en la venta, el cual en su traje mostraba ser cristiano
recién venido de tierra de moros, porque venía vestido con una casaca de
paño azul, corta de faldas, con medias mangas y sin cuello; los calzones
eran asimismo de lienzo azul, con bonete de la misma color; traía unos
borceguíes datilados y un alfanje morisco, puesto en un tahelí que le
atravesaba el pecho. Entró luego tras él, encima de un jumento, una mujer a
la morisca vestida, cubierto el rostro con una toca en la cabeza; traía un
bonetillo de brocado, y vestida una almalafa, que desde los hombros a los
pies la cubría. Era el hombre de robusto y agraciado talle, de edad de poco
más de cuarenta años, algo moreno de rostro, largo de bigotes y la barba
muy bien puesta. En resolución, él mostraba en su apostura que si estuviera
bien vestido, le juzgaran por persona de calidad y bien nacida.

Pidió, en entrando, un aposento, y, como le dijeron que en la venta no le
había, mostró recebir pesadumbre; y, llegándose a la que en el traje
parecía mora, la apeó en sus brazos. Luscinda, Dorotea, la ventera, su hija
y Maritornes, llevadas del nuevo y para ellas nunca visto traje, rodearon a
la mora, y Dorotea, que siempre fue agraciada, comedida y discreta,
pareciéndole que así ella como el que la traía se congojaban por la falta
del aposento, le dijo:

-No os dé mucha pena, señora mía, la incomodidad de regalo que aquí falta,
pues es proprio de ventas no hallarse en ellas; pero, con todo esto, si
gustáredes de pasar con nosotras -señalando a Luscinda-, quizá en el
discurso de este camino habréis hallado otros no tan buenos acogimientos.

No respondió nada a esto la embozada, ni hizo otra cosa que levantarse de
donde sentado se había, y, puestas entrambas manos cruzadas sobre el pecho,
inclinada la cabeza, dobló el cuerpo en señal de que lo agradecía. Por su
silencio imaginaron que, sin duda alguna, debía de ser mora, y que no sabía
hablar cristiano. Llegó, en esto, el cautivo, que entendiendo en otra cosa
hasta entonces había estado, y, viendo que todas tenían cercada a la que
con él venía, y que ella a cuanto le decían callaba, dijo:

-Señoras mías, esta doncella apenas entiende mi lengua, ni sabe hablar otra
ninguna sino conforme a su tierra, y por esto no debe de haber respondido,
ni responde, a lo que se le ha preguntado.

-No se le pregunta otra cosa ninguna -respondió Luscinda- sino ofrecelle
por esta noche nuestra compañía y parte del lugar donde nos acomodáremos,
donde se le hará el regalo que la comodidad ofreciere, con la voluntad que
obliga a servir a todos los estranjeros que dello tuvieren necesidad,
especialmente siendo mujer a quien se sirve.

-Por ella y por mí -respondió el captivo- os beso, señora mía, las manos, y
estimo mucho y en lo que es razón la merced ofrecida; que en tal ocasión, y
de tales personas como vuestro parecer muestra, bien se echa de ver que ha
de ser muy grande.

-Decidme, señor -dijo Dorotea-: ¿esta señora es cristiana o mora? Porque el
traje y el silencio nos hace pensar que es lo que no querríamos que fuese.

-Mora es en el traje y en el cuerpo, pero en el alma es muy grande
cristiana, porque tiene grandísimos deseos de serlo.

-Luego, ¿no es baptizada? -replicó Luscinda.

-No ha habido lugar para ello -respondió el captivo- después que salió de
Argel, su patria y tierra, y hasta agora no se ha visto en peligro de
muerte tan cercana que obligase a baptizalla sin que supiese primero todas
las ceremonias que nuestra Madre la Santa Iglesia manda; pero Dios será
servido que presto se bautice con la decencia que la calidad de su persona
merece, que es más de lo que muestra su hábito y el mío.

Con estas razones puso gana en todos los que escuchándole estaban de
saber quién fuese la mora y el captivo, pero nadie se lo quiso preguntar
por entonces, por ver que aquella sazón era más para procurarles descanso
que para preguntarles sus vidas. Dorotea la tomó por la mano y la llevó a
sentar junto a sí, y le rogó que se quitase el embozo. Ella miró al
cautivo, como si le preguntara le dijese lo que decían y lo que ella haría.
Él, en lengua arábiga, le dijo que le pedían se quitase el embozo, y que lo
hiciese; y así, se lo quitó, y descubrió un rostro tan hermoso que Dorotea
la tuvo por más hermosa que a Luscinda, y Luscinda por más hermosa que a
Dorotea, y todos los circustantes conocieron que si alguno se podría
igualar al de las dos, era el de la mora, y aun hubo algunos que le
aventajaron en alguna cosa. Y, como la hermosura tenga prerrogativa y
gracia de reconciliar los ánimos y atraer las voluntades, luego se
rindieron todos al deseo de servir y acariciar a la hermosa mora.

Preguntó don Fernando al captivo cómo se llamaba la mora, el cual respondió
que lela Zoraida; y, así como esto oyó, ella entendió lo que le habían
preguntado al cristiano, y dijo con mucha priesa, llena de congoja y
donaire:

-¡No, no Zoraida: María, María! -dando a entender que se llamaba María y no
Zoraida.

Estas palabras, el grande afecto con que la mora las dijo, hicieron
derramar más de una lágrima a algunos de los que la escucharon,
especialmente a las mujeres, que de su naturaleza son tiernas y compasivas.
Abrazóla Luscinda con mucho amor, diciéndole:

-Sí, sí: María, María.

A lo cual respondió la mora:

-¡Sí, sí: María; Zoraida macange! -que quiere decir no.

Ya en esto llegaba la noche, y, por orden de los que venían con don
Fernando, había el ventero puesto diligencia y cuidado en aderezarles de
cenar lo mejor que a él le fue posible. Llegada, pues, la hora, sentáronse
todos a una larga mesa, como de tinelo, porque no la había redonda ni
cuadrada en la venta, y dieron la cabecera y principal asiento, puesto que
él lo rehusaba, a don Quijote, el cual quiso que estuviese a su lado la
señora Micomicona, pues él era su aguardador. Luego se sentaron Luscinda y
Zoraida, y frontero dellas don Fernando y Cardenio, y luego el cautivo y
los demás caballeros, y, al lado de las señoras, el cura y el barbero. Y
así, cenaron con mucho contento, y acrecentóseles más viendo que, dejando
de comer don Quijote, movido de otro semejante espíritu que el que le movió
a hablar tanto como habló cuando cenó con los cabreros, comenzó a decir:

-Verdaderamente, si bien se considera, señores míos, grandes e inauditas
cosas ven los que profesan la orden de la andante caballería. Si no, ¿cuál
de los vivientes habrá en el mundo que ahora por la puerta deste castillo
entrara, y de la suerte que estamos nos viere, que juzgue y crea que
nosotros somos quien somos? ¿Quién podrá decir que esta señora que está a
mi lado es la gran reina que todos sabemos, y que yo soy aquel Caballero de
la Triste Figura que anda por ahí en boca de la fama? Ahora no hay que
dudar, sino que esta arte y ejercicio excede a todas aquellas y aquellos
que los hombres inventaron, y tanto más se ha de tener en estima cuanto a
más peligros está sujeto. Quítenseme delante los que dijeren que las letras
hacen ventaja a las armas, que les diré, y sean quien se fueren, que no
saben lo que dicen. Porque la razón que los tales suelen decir, y a lo que
ellos más se atienen, es que los trabajos del espíritu exceden a los del
cuerpo, y que las armas sólo con el cuerpo se ejercitan, como si fuese su
ejercicio oficio de ganapanes, para el cual no es menester más de buenas
fuerzas; o como si en esto que llamamos armas los que las profesamos no se
encerrasen los actos de la fortaleza, los cuales piden para ejecutallos
mucho entendimiento; o como si no trabajase el ánimo del guerrero que tiene
a su cargo un ejército, o la defensa de una ciudad sitiada, así con el
espíritu como con el cuerpo. Si no, véase si se alcanza con las fuerzas
corporales a saber y conjeturar el intento del enemigo, los disignios, las
estratagemas, las dificultades, el prevenir los daños que se temen; que
todas estas cosas son acciones del entendimiento, en quien no tiene parte
alguna el cuerpo. Siendo pues ansí, que las armas requieren espíritu, como
las letras, veamos ahora cuál de los dos espíritus, el del letrado o el del
guerrero, trabaja más. Y esto se vendrá a conocer por el fin y paradero a
que cada uno se encamina, porque aquella intención se ha de estimar en más
que tiene por objeto más noble fin. Es el fin y paradero de las letras...,
y no hablo ahora de las divinas, que tienen por blanco llevar y encaminar
las almas al cielo, que a un fin tan sin fin como éste ninguno otro se le
puede igualar; hablo de las letras humanas, que es su fin poner en su punto
la justicia distributiva y dar a cada uno lo que es suyo, entender y hacer
que las buenas leyes se guarden. Fin, por cierto, generoso y alto y digno
de grande alabanza, pero no de tanta como merece aquel a que las armas
atienden, las cuales tienen por objeto y fin la paz, que es el mayor bien
que los hombres pueden desear en esta vida. Y así, las primeras buenas
nuevas que tuvo el mundo y tuvieron los hombres fueron las que dieron los
ángeles la noche que fue nuestro día, cuando cantaron en los aires:
''Gloria sea en las alturas, y paz en la tierra, a los hombres de buena
voluntad''; y a la salutación que el mejor maestro de la tierra y del cielo
enseñó a sus allegados y favoridos, fue decirles que cuando entrasen en
alguna casa, dijesen: ''Paz sea en esta casa''; y otras muchas veces les
dijo: ''Mi paz os doy, mi paz os dejo: paz sea con vosotros'', bien como
joya y prenda dada y dejada de tal mano; joya que sin ella, en la tierra ni
en el cielo puede haber bien alguno. Esta paz es el verdadero fin de la
guerra, que lo mesmo es decir armas que guerra. Prosupuesta, pues, esta
verdad, que el fin de la guerra es la paz, y que en esto hace ventaja al
fin de las letras, vengamos ahora a los trabajos del cuerpo del letrado y a
los del profesor de las armas, y véase cuáles son mayores.

De tal manera, y por tan buenos términos, iba prosiguiendo en su plática
don Quijote que obligó a que, por entonces, ninguno de los que escuchándole
estaban le tuviese por loco; antes, como todos los más eran caballeros, a
quien son anejas las armas, le escuchaban de muy buena gana; y él prosiguió
diciendo:

-Digo, pues, que los trabajos del estudiante son éstos: principalmente
pobreza (no porque todos sean pobres, sino por poner este caso en todo el
estremo que pueda ser); y, en haber dicho que padece pobreza, me parece que
no había que decir más de su mala ventura, porque quien es pobre no tiene
cosa buena. Esta pobreza la padece por sus partes, ya en hambre, ya en
frío, ya en desnudez, ya en todo junto; pero, con todo eso, no es tanta que
no coma, aunque sea un poco más tarde de lo que se usa, aunque sea de las
sobras de los ricos; que es la mayor miseria del estudiante éste que entre
ellos llaman andar a la sopa; y no les falta algún ajeno brasero o
chimenea, que, si no callenta, a lo menos entibie su frío, y, en fin, la
noche duermen debajo de cubierta. No quiero llegar a otras menudencias,
conviene a saber, de la falta de camisas y no sobra de zapatos, la raridad
y poco pelo del vestido, ni aquel ahitarse con tanto gusto, cuando la buena
suerte les depara algún banquete. Por este camino que he pintado, áspero y
dificultoso, tropezando aquí, cayendo allí, levantándose acullá, tornando a
caer acá, llegan al grado que desean; el cual alcanzado, a muchos hemos
visto que, habiendo pasado por estas Sirtes y por estas Scilas y Caribdis,
como llevados en vuelo de la favorable fortuna, digo que los hemos visto
mandar y gobernar el mundo desde una silla, trocada su hambre en hartura,
su frío en refrigerio, su desnudez en galas, y su dormir en una estera en
reposar en holandas y damascos: premio justamente merecido de su virtud.
Pero, contrapuestos y comparados sus trabajos con los del mílite guerrero,
se quedan muy atrás en todo, como ahora diré.





Capítulo XXXVIII. Que trata del curioso discurso que hizo don Quijote de
las armas y las letras


Prosiguiendo don Quijote, dijo:

-Pues comenzamos en el estudiante por la pobreza y sus partes, veamos si es
más rico el soldado. Y veremos que no hay ninguno más pobre en la misma
pobreza, porque está atenido a la miseria de su paga, que viene o tarde o
nunca, o a lo que garbeare por sus manos, con notable peligro de su vida y
de su conciencia. Y a veces suele ser su desnudez tanta, que un coleto
acuchillado le sirve de gala y de camisa, y en la mitad del invierno se
suele reparar de las inclemencias del cielo, estando en la campaña rasa,
con sólo el aliento de su boca, que, como sale de lugar vacío, tengo por
averiguado que debe de salir frío, contra toda naturaleza. Pues esperad que
espere que llegue la noche, para restaurarse de todas estas incomodidades,
en la cama que le aguarda, la cual, si no es por su culpa, jamás pecará de
estrecha; que bien puede medir en la tierra los pies que quisiere, y
revolverse en ella a su sabor, sin temor que se le encojan las sábanas.
Lléguese, pues, a todo esto, el día y la hora de recebir el grado de su
ejercicio; lléguese un día de batalla, que allí le pondrán la borla en la
cabeza, hecha de hilas, para curarle algún balazo, que quizá le habrá
pasado las sienes, o le dejará estropeado de brazo o pierna. Y, cuando esto
no suceda, sino que el cielo piadoso le guarde y conserve sano y vivo,
podrá ser que se quede en la mesma pobreza que antes estaba, y que sea
menester que suceda uno y otro rencuentro, una y otra batalla, y que de
todas salga vencedor, para medrar en algo; pero estos milagros vense raras
veces. Pero, decidme, señores, si habéis mirado en ello: ¿cuán menos son
los premiados por la guerra que los que han perecido en ella? Sin duda,
habéis de responder que no tienen comparación, ni se pueden reducir a
cuenta los muertos, y que se podrán contar los premiados vivos con tres
letras de guarismo. Todo esto es al revés en los letrados; porque, de
faldas, que no quiero decir de mangas, todos tienen en qué entretenerse.
Así que, aunque es mayor el trabajo del soldado, es mucho menor el premio.
Pero a esto se puede responder que es más fácil premiar a dos mil letrados
que a treinta mil soldados, porque a aquéllos se premian con darles
oficios, que por fuerza se han de dar a los de su profesión, y a éstos no
se pueden premiar sino con la mesma hacienda del señor a quien sirven; y
esta imposibilidad fortifica más la razón que tengo. Pero dejemos esto
aparte, que es laberinto de muy dificultosa salida, sino volvamos a la
preeminencia de las armas contra las letras, materia que hasta ahora está
por averiguar, según son las razones que cada una de su parte alega. Y,
entre las que he dicho, dicen las letras que sin ellas no se podrían
sustentar las armas, porque la guerra también tiene sus leyes y está sujeta
a ellas, y que las leyes caen debajo de lo que son letras y letrados. A
esto responden las armas que las leyes no se podrán sustentar sin ellas,
porque con las armas se defienden las repúblicas, se conservan los reinos,
se guardan las ciudades, se aseguran los caminos, se despejan los mares de
cosarios; y, finalmente, si por ellas no fuese, las repúblicas, los reinos,
las monarquías, las ciudades, los caminos de mar y tierra estarían sujetos
al rigor y a la confusión que trae consigo la guerra el tiempo que dura y
tiene licencia de usar de sus previlegios y de sus fuerzas. Y es razón
averiguada que aquello que más cuesta se estima y debe de estimar en más.
Alcanzar alguno a ser eminente en letras le cuesta tiempo, vigilias,
hambre, desnudez, váguidos de cabeza, indigestiones de estómago, y otras
cosas a éstas adherentes, que, en parte, ya las tengo referidas; mas llegar
uno por sus términos a ser buen soldado le cuesta todo lo que a el
estudiante, en tanto mayor grado que no tiene comparación, porque a cada
paso está a pique de perder la vida. Y ¿qué temor de necesidad y pobreza
puede llegar ni fatigar al estudiante, que llegue al que tiene un soldado,
que, hallándose cercado en alguna fuerza, y estando de posta, o guarda, en
algún revellín o caballero, siente que los enemigos están minando hacia la
parte donde él está, y no puede apartarse de allí por ningún caso, ni huir
el peligro que de tan cerca le amenaza? Sólo lo que puede hacer es dar
noticia a su capitán de lo que pasa, para que lo remedie con alguna
contramina, y él estarse quedo, temiendo y esperando cuándo improvisamente
ha de subir a las nubes sin alas y bajar al profundo sin su voluntad. Y si
éste parece pequeño peligro, veamos si le iguala o hace ventajas el de
embestirse dos galeras por las proas en mitad del mar espacioso, las cuales
enclavijadas y trabadas, no le queda al soldado más espacio del que concede
dos pies de tabla del espolón; y, con todo esto, viendo que tiene delante
de sí tantos ministros de la muerte que le amenazan cuantos cañones de
artillería se asestan de la parte contraria, que no distan de su cuerpo una
lanza, y viendo que al primer descuido de los pies iría a visitar los
profundos senos de Neptuno; y, con todo esto, con intrépido corazón,
llevado de la honra que le incita, se pone a ser blanco de tanta
arcabucería, y procura pasar por tan estrecho paso al bajel contrario. Y lo
que más es de admirar: que apenas uno ha caído donde no se podrá levantar
hasta la fin del mundo, cuando otro ocupa su mesmo lugar; y si éste también
cae en el mar, que como a enemigo le aguarda, otro y otro le sucede, sin
dar tiempo al tiempo de sus muertes: valentía y atrevimiento el mayor que
se puede hallar en todos los trances de la guerra. Bien hayan aquellos
benditos siglos que carecieron de la espantable furia de aquestos
endemoniados instrumentos de la artillería, a cuyo inventor tengo para mí
que en el infierno se le está dando el premio de su diabólica invención,
con la cual dio causa que un infame y cobarde brazo quite la vida a un
valeroso caballero, y que, sin saber cómo o por dónde, en la mitad del
coraje y brío que enciende y anima a los valientes pechos, llega una
desmandada bala, disparada de quien quizá huyó y se espantó del resplandor
que hizo el fuego al disparar de la maldita máquina, y corta y acaba en un
instante los pensamientos y vida de quien la merecía gozar luengos siglos.
Y así, considerando esto, estoy por decir que en el alma me pesa de haber
tomado este ejercicio de caballero andante en edad tan detestable como es
esta en que ahora vivimos; porque, aunque a mí ningún peligro me pone
miedo, todavía me pone recelo pensar si la pólvora y el estaño me han de
quitar la ocasión de hacerme famoso y conocido por el valor de mi brazo y
filos de mi espada, por todo lo descubierto de la tierra. Pero haga el
cielo lo que fuere servido, que tanto seré más estimado, si salgo con lo
que pretendo, cuanto a mayores peligros me he puesto que se pusieron los
caballeros andantes de los pasados siglos.

Todo este largo preámbulo dijo don Quijote, en tanto que los demás cenaban,
olvidándose de llevar bocado a la boca, puesto que algunas veces le había
dicho Sancho Panza que cenase, que después habría lugar para decir todo lo
que quisiese. En los que escuchado le habían sobrevino nueva lástima de ver
que hombre que, al parecer, tenía buen entendimiento y buen discurso en
todas las cosas que trataba, le hubiese perdido tan rematadamente, en
tratándole de su negra y pizmienta caballería. El cura le dijo que tenía
mucha razón en todo cuanto había dicho en favor de las armas, y que él,
aunque letrado y graduado, estaba de su mesmo parecer.

Acabaron de cenar, levantaron los manteles, y, en tanto que la ventera, su
hija y Maritornes aderezaban el camaranchón de don Quijote de la Mancha,
donde habían determinado que aquella noche las mujeres solas en él se
recogiesen, don Fernando rogó al cautivo les contase el discurso de su
vida, porque no podría ser sino que fuese peregrino y gustoso, según las
muestras que había comenzado a dar, viniendo en compañía de Zoraida. A lo
cual respondió el cautivo que de muy buena gana haría lo que se le mandaba,
y que sólo temía que el cuento no había de ser tal, que les diese el gusto
que él deseaba; pero que, con todo eso, por no faltar en obedecelle, le
contaría. El cura y todos los demás se lo agradecieron, y de nuevo se lo
rogaron; y él, viéndose rogar de tantos, dijo que no eran menester ruegos
adonde el mandar tenía tanta fuerza.

-Y así, estén vuestras mercedes atentos, y oirán un discurso verdadero, a
quien podría ser que no llegasen los mentirosos que con curioso y pensado
artificio suelen componerse.

Con esto que dijo, hizo que todos se acomodasen y le prestasen un grande
silencio; y él, viendo que ya callaban y esperaban lo que decir quisiese,
con voz agradable y reposada, comenzó a decir desta manera:





Capítulo XXXIX. Donde el cautivo cuenta su vida y sucesos


-«En un lugar de las Montañas de León tuvo principio mi linaje, con quien
fue más agradecida y liberal la naturaleza que la fortuna, aunque, en la
estrecheza de aquellos pueblos, todavía alcanzaba mi padre fama de rico, y
verdaderamente lo fuera si así se diera maña a conservar su hacienda como
se la daba en gastalla. Y la condición que tenía de ser liberal y gastador
le procedió de haber sido soldado los años de su joventud, que es escuela
la soldadesca donde el mezquino se hace franco, y el franco, pródigo; y si
algunos soldados se hallan miserables, son como monstruos, que se ven raras
veces. Pasaba mi padre los términos de la liberalidad, y rayaba en los de
ser pródigo: cosa que no le es de ningún provecho al hombre casado, y que
tiene hijos que le han de suceder en el nombre y en el ser. Los que mi
padre tenía eran tres, todos varones y todos de edad de poder elegir
estado. Viendo, pues, mi padre que, según él decía, no podía irse a la mano
contra su condición, quiso privarse del instrumento y causa que le hacía
gastador y dadivoso, que fue privarse de la hacienda, sin la cual el mismo
Alejandro pareciera estrecho.

»Y así, llamándonos un día a todos tres a solas en un aposento, nos dijo
unas razones semejantes a las que ahora diré: ''Hijos, para deciros que os
quiero bien, basta saber y decir que sois mis hijos; y, para entender que
os quiero mal, basta saber que no me voy a la mano en lo que toca a
conservar vuestra hacienda. Pues, para que entendáis desde aquí adelante
que os quiero como padre, y que no os quiero destruir como padrastro,
quiero hacer una cosa con vosotros que ha muchos días que la tengo pensada
y con madura consideración dispuesta. Vosotros estáis ya en edad de tomar
estado, o, a lo menos, de elegir ejercicio, tal que, cuando mayores, os
honre y aproveche. Y lo que he pensado es hacer de mi hacienda cuatro
partes: las tres os daré a vosotros, a cada uno lo que le tocare, sin
exceder en cosa alguna, y con la otra me quedaré yo para vivir y
sustentarme los días que el cielo fuere servido de darme de vida. Pero
querría que, después que cada uno tuviese en su poder la parte que le toca
de su hacienda, siguiese uno de los caminos que le diré. Hay un refrán en
nuestra España, a mi parecer muy verdadero, como todos lo son, por ser
sentencias breves sacadas de la luenga y discreta experiencia; y el que yo
digo dice: "Iglesia, o mar, o casa real", como si más claramente dijera:
"Quien quisiere valer y ser rico, siga o la Iglesia, o navegue, ejercitando
el arte de la mercancía, o entre a servir a los reyes en sus casas"; porque
dicen: "Más vale migaja de rey que merced de señor". Digo esto porque
querría, y es mi voluntad, que uno de vosotros siguiese las letras, el otro
la mercancía, y el otro sirviese al rey en la guerra, pues es dificultoso
entrar a servirle en su casa; que, ya que la guerra no dé muchas riquezas,
suele dar mucho valor y mucha fama. Dentro de ocho días, os daré toda
vuestra parte en dineros, sin defraudaros en un ardite, como lo veréis por
la obra. Decidme ahora si queréis seguir mi parecer y consejo en lo que os
he propuesto''. Y, mandándome a mí, por ser el mayor, que respondiese,
después de haberle dicho que no se deshiciese de la hacienda, sino que
gastase todo lo que fuese su voluntad, que nosotros éramos mozos para saber
ganarla, vine a concluir en que cumpliría su gusto, y que el mío era seguir
el ejercicio de las armas, sirviendo en él a Dios y a mi rey. El segundo
hermano hizo los mesmos ofrecimientos, y escogió el irse a las Indias,
llevando empleada la hacienda que le cupiese. El menor, y, a lo que yo
creo, el más discreto, dijo que quería seguir la Iglesia, o irse a acabar
sus comenzados estudios a Salamanca. Así como acabamos de concordarnos y
escoger nuestros ejercicios, mi padre nos abrazó a todos, y, con la
brevedad que dijo, puso por obra cuanto nos había prometido; y, dando a
cada uno su parte, que, a lo que se me acuerda, fueron cada tres mil
ducados, en dineros (porque un nuestro tío compró toda la hacienda y la
pagó de contado, porque no saliese del tronco de la casa), en un mesmo día
nos despedimos todos tres de nuestro buen padre; y, en aquel mesmo,
pareciéndome a mí ser inhumanidad que mi padre quedase viejo y con tan poca
hacienda, hice con él que de mis tres mil tomase los dos mil ducados,
porque a mí me bastaba el resto para acomodarme de lo que había menester un
soldado. Mis dos hermanos, movidos de mi ejemplo, cada uno le dio mil
ducados: de modo que a mi padre le quedaron cuatro mil en dineros, y más
tres mil, que, a lo que parece, valía la hacienda que le cupo, que no quiso
vender, sino quedarse con ella en raíces. Digo, en fin, que nos despedimos
dél y de aquel nuestro tío que he dicho, no sin mucho sentimiento y
lágrimas de todos, encargándonos que les hiciésemos saber, todas las veces
que hubiese comodidad para ello, de nuestros sucesos, prósperos o adversos.
Prometímosselo, y, abrazándonos y echándonos su bendición, el uno tomó el
viaje de Salamanca, el otro de Sevilla y yo el de Alicante, adonde tuve
nuevas que había una nave ginovesa que cargaba allí lana para Génova.

»Éste hará veinte y dos años que salí de casa de mi padre, y en todos
ellos, puesto que he escrito algunas cartas, no he sabido dél ni de mis
hermanos nueva alguna. Y lo que en este discurso de tiempo he pasado lo
diré brevemente. Embarquéme en Alicante, llegué con próspero viaje a
Génova, fui desde allí a Milán, donde me acomodé de armas y de algunas
galas de soldado, de donde quise ir a asentar mi plaza al Piamonte; y,
estando ya de camino para Alejandría de la Palla, tuve nuevas que el gran
duque de Alba pasaba a Flandes. Mudé propósito, fuime con él, servíle en
las jornadas que hizo, halléme en la muerte de los condes de Eguemón y de
Hornos, alcancé a ser alférez de un famoso capitán de Guadalajara, llamado
Diego de Urbina; y, a cabo de algún tiempo que llegué a Flandes, se tuvo
nuevas de la liga que la Santidad del Papa Pío Quinto, de felice
recordación, había hecho con Venecia y con España, contra el enemigo común,
que es el Turco; el cual, en aquel mesmo tiempo, había ganado con su armada
la famosa isla de Chipre, que estaba debajo del dominio del veneciano: y
pérdida lamentable y desdichada. Súpose cierto que venía por general desta
liga el serenísimo don Juan de Austria, hermano natural de nuestro buen rey
don Felipe. Divulgóse el grandísimo aparato de guerra que se hacía. Todo lo
cual me incitó y conmovió el ánimo y el deseo de verme en la jornada que se
esperaba; y, aunque tenía barruntos, y casi promesas ciertas, de que en la
primera ocasión que se ofreciese sería promovido a capitán, lo quise dejar
todo y venirme, como me vine, a Italia. Y quiso mi buena suerte que el
señor don Juan de Austria acababa de llegar a Génova, que pasaba a Nápoles
a juntarse con la armada de Venecia, como después lo hizo en Mecina.

»Digo, en fin, que yo me hallé en aquella felicísima jornada, ya hecho
capitán de infantería, a cuyo honroso cargo me subió mi buena suerte, más
que mis merecimientos. Y aquel día, que fue para la cristiandad tan
dichoso, porque en él se desengañó el mundo y todas las naciones del error
en que estaban, creyendo que los turcos eran invencibles por la mar: en
aquel día, digo, donde quedó el orgullo y soberbia otomana quebrantada,
entre tantos venturosos como allí hubo (porque más ventura tuvieron los
cristianos que allí murieron que los que vivos y vencedores quedaron), yo
solo fui el desdichado, pues, en cambio de que pudiera esperar, si fuera en
los romanos siglos, alguna naval corona, me vi aquella noche que siguió a
tan famoso día con cadenas a los pies y esposas a las manos.

»Y fue desta suerte: que, habiendo el Uchalí, rey de Argel, atrevido y
venturoso cosario, embestido y rendido la capitana de Malta, que solos tres
caballeros quedaron vivos en ella, y éstos malheridos, acudió la capitana
de Juan Andrea a socorrella, en la cual yo iba con mi compañía; y, haciendo
lo que debía en ocasión semejante, salté en la galera contraria, la cual,
desviándose de la que la había embestido, estorbó que mis soldados me
siguiesen, y así, me hallé solo entre mis enemigos, a quien no pude
resistir, por ser tantos; en fin, me rindieron lleno de heridas. Y, como ya
habréis, señores, oído decir que el Uchalí se salvó con toda su escuadra,
vine yo a quedar cautivo en su poder, y solo fui el triste entre tantos
alegres y el cautivo entre tantos libres; porque fueron quince mil
cristianos los que aquel día alcanzaron la deseada libertad, que todos
venían al remo en la turquesca armada.

»Lleváronme a Costantinopla, donde el Gran Turco Selim hizo general de la
mar a mi amo, porque había hecho su deber en la batalla, habiendo llevado
por muestra de su valor el estandarte de la religión de Malta. Halléme el
segundo año, que fue el de setenta y dos, en Navarino, bogando en la
capitana de los tres fanales. Vi y noté la ocasión que allí se perdió de no
coger en el puerto toda el armada turquesca, porque todos los leventes y
jenízaros que en ella venían tuvieron por cierto que les habían de embestir
dentro del mesmo puerto, y tenían a punto su ropa y pasamaques, que son sus
zapatos, para huirse luego por tierra, sin esperar ser combatidos: tanto
era el miedo que habían cobrado a nuestra armada. Pero el cielo lo ordenó
de otra manera, no por culpa ni descuido del general que a los nuestros
regía, sino por los pecados de la cristiandad, y porque quiere y permite
Dios que tengamos siempre verdugos que nos castiguen.

»En efeto, el Uchalí se recogió a Modón, que es una isla que está junto a
Navarino, y, echando la gente en tierra, fortificó la boca del puerto, y
estúvose quedo hasta que el señor don Juan se volvió. En este viaje se tomó
la galera que se llamaba La Presa, de quien era capitán un hijo de aquel
famoso cosario Barbarroja. Tomóla la capitana de Nápoles, llamada La Loba,
regida por aquel rayo de la guerra, por el padre de los soldados, por aquel
venturoso y jamás vencido capitán don Álvaro de Bazán, marqués de Santa
Cruz. Y no quiero dejar de decir lo que sucedió en la presa de La Presa.
Era tan cruel el hijo de Barbarroja, y trataba tan mal a sus cautivos, que,
así como los que venían al remo vieron que la galera Loba les iba entrando
y que los alcanzaba, soltaron todos a un tiempo los remos, y asieron de su
capitán, que estaba sobre el estanterol gritando que bogasen apriesa, y
pasándole de banco en banco, de popa a proa, le dieron bocados, que a poco
más que pasó del árbol ya había pasado su ánima al infierno: tal era, como
he dicho, la crueldad con que los trataba y el odio que ellos le tenían.

»Volvimos a Constantinopla, y el año siguiente, que fue el de setenta y
tres, se supo en ella cómo el señor don Juan había ganado a Túnez, y
quitado aquel reino a los turcos y puesto en posesión dél a Muley Hamet,
cortando las esperanzas que de volver a reinar en él tenía Muley Hamida, el
moro más cruel y más valiente que tuvo el mundo. Sintió mucho esta pérdida
el Gran Turco, y, usando de la sagacidad que todos los de su casa tienen,
hizo paz con venecianos, que mucho más que él la deseaban; y el año
siguiente de setenta y cuatro acometió a la Goleta y al fuerte que junto a
Túnez había dejado medio levantado el señor don Juan. En todos estos
trances andaba yo al remo, sin esperanza de libertad alguna; a lo menos, no
esperaba tenerla por rescate, porque tenía determinado de no escribir las
nuevas de mi desgracia a mi padre.

»Perdióse, en fin, la Goleta; perdióse el fuerte, sobre las cuales plazas
hubo de soldados turcos, pagados, setenta y cinco mil, y de moros, y
alárabes de toda la Africa, más de cuatrocientos mil, acompañado este tan
gran número de gente con tantas municiones y pertrechos de guerra, y con
tantos gastadores, que con las manos y a puñados de tierra pudieran cubrir
la Goleta y el fuerte. Perdióse primero la Goleta, tenida hasta entonces
por inexpugnable; y no se perdió por culpa de sus defensores, los cuales
hicieron en su defensa todo aquello que debían y podían, sino porque la
experiencia mostró la facilidad con que se podían levantar trincheas en
aquella desierta arena, porque a dos palmos se hallaba agua, y los turcos
no la hallaron a dos varas; y así, con muchos sacos de arena levantaron las
trincheas tan altas que sobrepujaban las murallas de la fuerza; y,
tirándoles a caballero, ninguno podía parar, ni asistir a la defensa. Fue
común opinión que no se habían de encerrar los nuestros en la Goleta, sino
esperar en campaña al desembarcadero; y los que esto dicen hablan de lejos
y con poca experiencia de casos semejantes, porque si en la Goleta y en el
fuerte apenas había siete mil soldados, ¿cómo podía tan poco número, aunque
más esforzados fuesen, salir a la campaña y quedar en las fuerzas, contra
tanto como era el de los enemigos?; y ¿cómo es posible dejar de perderse
fuerza que no es socorrida, y más cuando la cercan enemigos muchos y
porfiados, y en su mesma tierra? Pero a muchos les pareció, y así me
pareció a mí, que fue particular gracia y merced que el cielo hizo a España
en permitir que se asolase aquella oficina y capa de maldades, y aquella
gomia o esponja y polilla de la infinidad de dineros que allí sin provecho
se gastaban, sin servir de otra cosa que de conservar la memoria de haberla
ganado la felicísima del invictísimo Carlos Quinto; como si fuera menester
para hacerla eterna, como lo es y será, que aquellas piedras la
sustentaran.

»Perdióse también el fuerte; pero fuéronle ganando los turcos palmo a
palmo, porque los soldados que lo defendían pelearon tan valerosa y
fuertemente, que pasaron de veinte y cinco mil enemigos los que mataron en
veinte y dos asaltos generales que les dieron. Ninguno cautivaron sano de
trecientos que quedaron vivos, señal cierta y clara de su esfuerzo y valor,
y de lo bien que se habían defendido y guardado sus plazas. Rindióse a
partido un pequeño fuerte o torre que estaba en mitad del estaño, a cargo
de don Juan Zanoguera, caballero valenciano y famoso soldado. Cautivaron a
don Pedro Puertocarrero, general de la Goleta, el cual hizo cuanto fue
posible por defender su fuerza; y sintió tanto el haberla perdido que de
pesar murió en el camino de Constantinopla, donde le llevaban cautivo.
Cautivaron ansimesmo al general del fuerte, que se llamaba Gabrio
Cervellón, caballero milanés, grande ingeniero y valentísimo soldado.
Murieron en estas dos fuerzas muchas personas de cuenta, de las cuales fue
una Pagán de Oria, caballero del hábito de San Juan, de condición generoso,
como lo mostró la summa liberalidad que usó con su hermano, el famoso Juan
de Andrea de Oria; y lo que más hizo lastimosa su muerte fue haber muerto a
manos de unos alárabes de quien se fió, viendo ya perdido el fuerte, que se
ofrecieron de llevarle en hábito de moro a Tabarca, que es un portezuelo o
casa que en aquellas riberas tienen los ginoveses que se ejercitan en la
pesquería del coral; los cuales alárabes le cortaron la cabeza y se la
trujeron al general de la armada turquesca, el cual cumplió con ellos
nuestro refrán castellano: "Que aunque la traición aplace, el traidor se
aborrece"; y así, se dice que mandó el general ahorcar a los que le
trujeron el presente, porque no se le habían traído vivo.

»Entre los cristianos que en el fuerte se perdieron, fue uno llamado don
Pedro de Aguilar, natural no sé de qué lugar del Andalucía, el cual había
sido alférez en el fuerte, soldado de mucha cuenta y de raro entendimiento:
especialmente tenía particular gracia en lo que llaman poesía. Dígolo
porque su suerte le trujo a mi galera y a mi banco, y a ser esclavo de mi
mesmo patrón; y, antes que nos partiésemos de aquel puerto, hizo este
caballero dos sonetos, a manera de epitafios, el uno a la Goleta y el otro
al fuerte. Y en verdad que los tengo de decir, porque los sé de memoria y
creo que antes causarán gusto que pesadumbre.»

En el punto que el cautivo nombró a don Pedro de Aguilar, don Fernando miró
a sus camaradas, y todos tres se sonrieron; y, cuando llegó a decir de los
sonetos, dijo el uno:

-Antes que vuestra merced pase adelante, le suplico me diga qué se hizo ese
don Pedro de Aguilar que ha dicho.

-Lo que sé es -respondió el cautivo- que, al cabo de dos años que estuvo en
Constantinopla, se huyó en traje de arnaúte con un griego espía, y no sé si
vino en libertad, puesto que creo que sí, porque de allí a un año vi yo al
griego en Constantinopla, y no le pude preguntar el suceso de aquel viaje.

-Pues lo fue -respondió el caballero-, porque ese don Pedro es mi hermano,
y está ahora en nuestro lugar, bueno y rico, casado y con tres hijos.

-Gracias sean dadas a Dios -dijo el cautivo- por tantas mercedes como le
hizo; porque no hay en la tierra, conforme mi parecer, contento que se
iguale a alcanzar la libertad perdida.

-Y más -replicó el caballero-, que yo sé los sonetos que mi hermano hizo.

-Dígalos, pues, vuestra merced -dijo el cautivo-, que los sabrá decir mejor
que yo.

-Que me place -respondió el caballero-; y el de la Goleta decía así:





Capítulo XL. Donde se prosigue la historia del cautivo


Soneto

   Almas dichosas que del mortal velo
   libres y esentas, por el bien que obrastes,
   desde la baja tierra os levantastes
   a lo más alto y lo mejor del cielo,
   y, ardiendo en ira y en honroso celo,
   de los cuerpos la fuerza ejercitastes,
   que en propia y sangre ajena colorastes
   el mar vecino y arenoso suelo;
   primero que el valor faltó la vida
   en los cansados brazos, que, muriendo,
   con ser vencidos, llevan la vitoria.
   Y esta vuestra mortal, triste caída
   entre el muro y el hierro, os va adquiriendo
   fama que el mundo os da, y el cielo gloria.

-Desa mesma manera le sé yo -dijo el cautivo.

-Pues el del fuerte, si mal no me acuerdo -dijo el caballero-, dice así:

Soneto

   De entre esta tierra estéril, derribada,
   destos terrones por el suelo echados,
   las almas santas de tres mil soldados
   subieron vivas a mejor morada,
   siendo primero, en vano, ejercitada
   la fuerza de sus brazos esforzados,
   hasta que, al fin, de pocos y cansados,
   dieron la vida al filo de la espada.
   Y éste es el suelo que continuo ha sido
   de mil memorias lamentables lleno
   en los pasados siglos y presentes.
   Mas no más justas de su duro seno
   habrán al claro cielo almas subido,
   ni aun él sostuvo cuerpos tan valientes.

No parecieron mal los sonetos, y el cautivo se alegró con las nuevas que de
su camarada le dieron; y, prosiguiendo su cuento, dijo:

-«Rendidos, pues, la Goleta y el fuerte, los turcos dieron orden en
desmantelar la Goleta, porque el fuerte quedó tal, que no hubo qué poner
por tierra, y para hacerlo con más brevedad y menos trabajo, la minaron por
tres partes; pero con ninguna se pudo volar lo que parecía menos fuerte,
que eran las murallas viejas; y todo aquello que había quedado en pie de la
fortificación nueva que había hecho el Fratín, con mucha facilidad vino a
tierra. En resolución, la armada volvió a Constantinopla, triunfante y
vencedora: y de allí a pocos meses murió mi amo el Uchalí, al cual llamaban
Uchalí Fartax, que quiere decir, en lengua turquesca, el renegado tiñoso,
porque lo era; y es costumbre entre los turcos ponerse nombres de alguna
falta que tengan, o de alguna virtud que en ellos haya. Y esto es porque no
hay entre ellos sino cuatro apellidos de linajes, que decienden de la casa
Otomana, y los demás, como tengo dicho, toman nombre y apellido ya de las
tachas del cuerpo y ya de las virtudes del ánimo. Y este Tiñoso bogó el
remo, siendo esclavo del Gran Señor, catorce años, y a más de los treinta y
cuatro de sus edad renegó, de despecho de que un turco, estando al remo,
le dio un bofetón, y por poderse vengar dejó su fe; y fue tanto su valor
que, sin subir por los torpes medios y caminos que los más privados del
Gran Turco suben, vino a ser rey de Argel, y después, a ser general de la
mar, que es el tercero cargo que hay en aquel señorío. Era calabrés de
nación, y moralmente fue un hombre de bien, y trataba con mucha humanidad a
sus cautivos, que llegó a tener tres mil, los cuales, después de su muerte,
se repartieron, como él lo dejó en su testamento, entre el Gran Señor (que
también es hijo heredero de cuantos mueren, y entra a la parte con los más
hijos que deja el difunto) y entre sus renegados; y yo cupe a un renegado
veneciano que, siendo grumete de una nave, le cautivó el Uchalí, y le quiso
tanto, que fue uno de los más regalados garzones suyos, y él vino a ser el
más cruel renegado que jamás se ha visto. Llamábase Azán Agá, y llegó a ser
muy rico, y a ser rey de Argel; con el cual yo vine de Constantinopla, algo
contento, por estar tan cerca de España, no porque pensase escribir a nadie
el desdichado suceso mío, sino por ver si me era más favorable la suerte en
Argel que en Constantinopla, donde ya había probado mil maneras de huirme,
y ninguna tuvo sazón ni ventura; y pensaba en Argel buscar otros medios de
alcanzar lo que tanto deseaba, porque jamás me desamparó la esperanza de
tener libertad; y cuando en lo que fabricaba, pensaba y ponía por obra no
correspondía el suceso a la intención, luego, sin abandonarme, fingía y
buscaba otra esperanza que me sustentase, aunque fuese débil y flaca.

»Con esto entretenía la vida, encerrado en una prisión o casa que los
turcos llaman baño, donde encierran los cautivos cristianos, así los que
son del rey como de algunos particulares; y los que llaman del almacén, que
es como decir cautivos del concejo, que sirven a la ciudad en las obras
públicas que hace y en otros oficios, y estos tales cautivos tienen muy
dificultosa su libertad, que, como son del común y no tienen amo
particular, no hay con quien tratar su rescate, aunque le tengan. En estos
baños, como tengo dicho, suelen llevar a sus cautivos algunos particulares
del pueblo, principalmente cuando son de rescate, porque allí los tienen
holgados y seguros hasta que venga su rescate. También los cautivos del rey
que son de rescate no salen al trabajo con la demás chusma, si no es cuando
se tarda su rescate; que entonces, por hacerles que escriban por él con más
ahínco, les hacen trabajar y ir por leña con los demás, que es un no
pequeño trabajo.

»Yo, pues, era uno de los de rescate; que, como se supo que era capitán,
puesto que dije mi poca posibilidad y falta de hacienda, no aprovechó nada
para que no me pusiesen en el número de los caballeros y gente de rescate.
Pusiéronme una cadena, más por señal de rescate que por guardarme con ella;
y así, pasaba la vida en aquel baño, con otros muchos caballeros y gente
principal, señalados y tenidos por de rescate. Y, aunque la hambre y
desnudez pudiera fatigarnos a veces, y aun casi siempre, ninguna cosa nos
fatigaba tanto como oír y ver, a cada paso, las jamás vistas ni oídas
crueldades que mi amo usaba con los cristianos. Cada día ahorcaba el suyo,
empalaba a éste, desorejaba aquél; y esto, por tan poca ocasión, y tan sin
ella, que los turcos conocían que lo hacía no más de por hacerlo, y por ser
natural condición suya ser homicida de todo el género humano. Sólo libró
bien con él un soldado español, llamado tal de Saavedra, el cual, con haber
hecho cosas que quedarán en la memoria de aquellas gentes por muchos años,
y todas por alcanzar libertad, jamás le dio palo, ni se lo mandó dar, ni le
dijo mala palabra; y, por la menor cosa de muchas que hizo, temíamos todos
que había de ser empalado, y así lo temió él más de una vez; y si no fuera
porque el tiempo no da lugar, yo dijera ahora algo de lo que este soldado
hizo, que fuera parte para entreteneros y admiraros harto mejor que con el
cuento de mi historia.

»Digo, pues, que encima del patio de nuestra prisión caían las ventanas de
la casa de un moro rico y principal, las cuales, como de ordinario son las
de los moros, más eran agujeros que ventanas, y aun éstas se cubrían con
celosías muy espesas y apretadas. Acaeció, pues, que un día, estando en un
terrado de nuestra prisión con otros tres compañeros, haciendo pruebas de
saltar con las cadenas, por entretener el tiempo, estando solos, porque
todos los demás cristianos habían salido a trabajar, alcé acaso los ojos y
vi que por aquellas cerradas ventanillas que he dicho parecía una caña, y
al remate della puesto un lienzo atado, y la caña se estaba blandeando y
moviéndose, casi como si hiciera señas que llegásemos a tomarla. Miramos en
ello, y uno de los que conmigo estaban fue a ponerse debajo de la caña, por
ver si la soltaban, o lo que hacían; pero, así como llegó, alzaron la caña
y la movieron a los dos lados, como si dijeran no con la cabeza. Volvióse
el cristiano, y tornáronla a bajar y hacer los mesmos movimientos que
primero. Fue otro de mis compañeros, y sucedióle lo mesmo que al primero.
Finalmente, fue el tercero y avínole lo que al primero y al segundo. Viendo
yo esto, no quise dejar de probar la suerte, y, así como llegué a ponerme
debajo de la caña, la dejaron caer, y dio a mis pies dentro del baño. Acudí
luego a desatar el lienzo, en el cual vi un nudo, y dentro dél venían diez
cianíis, que son unas monedas de oro bajo que usan los moros, que cada una
vale diez reales de los nuestros. Si me holgué con el hallazgo, no hay para
qué decirlo, pues fue tanto el contento como la admiración de pensar de
donde podía venirnos aquel bien, especialmente a mí, pues las muestras de
no haber querido soltar la caña sino a mí claro decían que a mí se hacía la
merced. Tomé mi buen dinero, quebré la caña, volvíme al terradillo, miré la
ventana, y vi que por ella salía una muy blanca mano, que la abrían y
cerraban muy apriesa. Con esto entendimos, o imaginamos, que alguna mujer
que en aquella casa vivía nos debía de haber hecho aquel beneficio; y, en
señal de que lo agradecíamos, hecimos zalemas a uso de moros, inclinando la
cabeza, doblando el cuerpo y poniendo los brazos sobre el pecho. De allí a
poco sacaron por la mesma ventana una pequeña cruz hecha de cañas, y luego
la volvieron a entrar. Esta señal nos confirmó en que alguna cristiana
debía de estar cautiva en aquella casa, y era la que el bien nos hacía;
pero la blancura de la mano, y las ajorcas que en ella vimos, nos deshizo
este pensamiento, puesto que imaginamos que debía de ser cristiana
renegada, a quien de ordinario suelen tomar por legítimas mujeres sus
mesmos amos, y aun lo tienen a ventura, porque las estiman en más que las
de su nación.

»En todos nuestros discursos dimos muy lejos de la verdad del caso; y así,
todo nuestro entretenimiento desde allí adelante era mirar y tener por
norte a la ventana donde nos había aparecido la estrella de la caña; pero
bien se pasaron quince días en que no la vimos, ni la mano tampoco, ni otra
señal alguna. Y, aunque en este tiempo procuramos con toda solicitud saber
quién en aquella casa vivía, y si había en ella alguna cristiana renegada,
jamás hubo quien nos dijese otra cosa, sino que allí vivía un moro
principal y rico, llamado Agi Morato, alcaide que había sido de La Pata,
que es oficio entre ellos de mucha calidad. Mas, cuando más descuidados
estábamos de que por allí habían de llover más cianíis, vimos a deshora
parecer la caña, y otro lienzo en ella, con otro nudo más crecido; y esto
fue a tiempo que estaba el baño, como la vez pasada, solo y sin gente.
Hecimos la acostumbrada prueba, yendo cada uno primero que yo, de los
mismos tres que estábamos, pero a ninguno se rindió la caña sino a mí,
porque, en llegando yo, la dejaron caer. Desaté el nudo, y hallé cuarenta
escudos de oro españoles y un papel escrito en arábigo, y al cabo de lo
escrito hecha una grande cruz. Besé la cruz, tomé los escudos, volvíme al
terrado, hecimos todos nuestras zalemas, tornó a parecer la mano, hice
señas que leería el papel, cerraron la ventana. Quedamos todos confusos y
alegres con lo sucedido; y, como ninguno de nosotros no entendía el
arábigo, era grande el deseo que teníamos de entender lo que el papel
contenía, y mayor la dificultad de buscar quien lo leyese.

»En fin, yo me determiné de fiarme de un renegado, natural de Murcia, que
se había dado por grande amigo mío, y puesto prendas entre los dos, que le
obligaban a guardar el secreto que le encargase; porque suelen algunos
renegados, cuando tienen intención de volverse a tierra de cristianos,
traer consigo algunas firmas de cautivos principales, en que dan fe, en la
forma que pueden, como el tal renegado es hombre de bien, y que siempre ha
hecho bien a cristianos, y que lleva deseo de huirse en la primera ocasión
que se le ofrezca. Algunos hay que procuran estas fees con buena intención,
otros se sirven dellas acaso y de industria: que, viniendo a robar a tierra
de cristianos, si a dicha se pierden o los cautivan, sacan sus firmas y
dicen que por aquellos papeles se verá el propósito con que venían, el cual
era de quedarse en tierra de cristianos, y que por eso venían en corso con
los demás turcos. Con esto se escapan de aquel primer ímpetu, y se
reconcilian con la Iglesia, sin que se les haga daño; y, cuando veen la
suya, se vuelven a Berbería a ser lo que antes eran. Otros hay que usan
destos papeles, y los procuran, con buen intento, y se quedan en tierra de
cristianos.

»Pues uno de los renegados que he dicho era este mi amigo, el cual tenía
firmas de todas nuestras camaradas, donde le acreditábamos cuanto era
posible; y si los moros le hallaran estos papeles, le quemaran vivo. Supe
que sabía muy bien arábigo, y no solamente hablarlo, sino escribirlo; pero,
antes que del todo me declarase con él, le dije que me leyese aquel papel,
que acaso me había hallado en un agujero de mi rancho. Abrióle, y estuvo un
buen espacio mirándole y construyéndole, murmurando entre los dientes.
Preguntéle si lo entendía; díjome que muy bien, y, que si quería que me lo
declarase palabra por palabra, que le diese tinta y pluma, porque mejor lo
hiciese. Dímosle luego lo que pedía, y él poco a poco lo fue traduciendo;
y, en acabando, dijo: ''Todo lo que va aquí en romance, sin faltar letra,
es lo que contiene este papel morisco; y hase de advertir que adonde dice
Lela Marién quiere decir Nuestra Señora la Virgen María''.

»Leímos el papel, y decía así:

Cuando yo era niña, tenía mi padre una esclava, la cual en mi lengua me
mostró la zalá cristianesca, y me dijo muchas cosas de Lela Marién. La
cristiana murió, y yo sé que no fue al fuego, sino con Alá, porque después
la vi dos veces, y me dijo que me fuese a tierra de cristianos a ver a Lela
Marién, que me quería mucho. No sé yo cómo vaya: muchos cristianos he visto
por esta ventana, y ninguno me ha parecido caballero sino tú. Yo soy muy
hermosa y muchacha, y tengo muchos dineros que llevar conmigo: mira tú si
puedes hacer cómo nos vamos, y serás allá mi marido, si quisieres, y si no
quisieres, no se me dará nada, que Lela Marién me dará con quien me case.
Yo escribí esto; mira a quién lo das a leer: no te fíes de ningún moro,
porque son todos marfuces. Desto tengo mucha pena: que quisiera que no te
descubrieras a nadie, porque si mi padre lo sabe, me echará luego en un
pozo, y me cubrirá de piedras. En la caña pondré un hilo: ata allí la
respuesta; y si no tienes quien te escriba arábigo, dímelo por señas, que
Lela Marién hará que te entienda. Ella y Alá te guarden, y esa cruz que yo
beso muchas veces; que así me lo mandó la cautiva.

»Mirad, señores, si era razón que las razones deste papel nos admirasen y
alegrasen. Y así, lo uno y lo otro fue de manera que el renegado entendió
que no acaso se había hallado aquel papel, sino que realmente a alguno de
nosotros se había escrito; y así, nos rogó que si era verdad lo que
sospechaba, que nos fiásemos dél y se lo dijésemos, que él aventuraría su
vida por nuestra libertad. Y, diciendo esto, sacó del pecho un crucifijo de
metal, y con muchas lágrimas juró por el Dios que aquella imagen
representaba, en quien él, aunque pecador y malo, bien y fielmente creía,
de guardarnos lealtad y secreto en todo cuanto quisiésemos descubrirle,
porque le parecía, y casi adevinaba que, por medio de aquella que aquel
papel había escrito, había él y todos nosotros de tener libertad, y verse
él en lo que tanto deseaba, que era reducirse al gremio de la Santa
Iglesia, su madre, de quien como miembro podrido estaba dividido y apartado
por su ignorancia y pecado.

»Con tantas lágrimas y con muestras de tanto arrepentimiento dijo esto el
renegado, que todos de un mesmo parecer consentimos, y venimos en
declararle la verdad del caso; y así, le dimos cuenta de todo, sin
encubrirle nada. Mostrámosle la ventanilla por donde parecía la caña, y él
marcó desde allí la casa, y quedó de tener especial y gran cuidado de
informarse quién en ella vivía. Acordamos, ansimesmo, que sería bien
responder al billete de la mora; y, como teníamos quien lo supiese hacer,
luego al momento el renegado escribió las razones que yo le fui notando,
que puntualmente fueron las que diré, porque de todos los puntos
sustanciales que en este suceso me acontecieron, ninguno se me ha ido de la
memoria, ni aun se me irá en tanto que tuviere vida.

»En efeto, lo que a la mora se le respondió fue esto:

El verdadero Alá te guarde, señora mía, y aquella bendita Marién, que es la
verdadera madre de Dios y es la que te ha puesto en corazón que te vayas a
tierra de cristianos, porque te quiere bien. Ruégale tú que se sirva de
darte a entender cómo podrás poner por obra lo que te manda, que ella es
tan buena que sí hará. De mi parte y de la de todos estos cristianos que
están conmigo, te ofrezco de hacer por ti todo lo que pudiéremos, hasta
morir. No dejes de escribirme y avisarme lo que pensares hacer, que yo te
responderé siempre; que el grande Alá nos ha dado un cristiano cautivo que
sabe hablar y escribir tu lengua tan bien como lo verás por este papel. Así
que, sin tener miedo, nos puedes avisar de todo lo que quisieres. A lo que
dices que si fueres a tierra de cristianos, que has de ser mi mujer, yo te
lo prometo como buen cristiano; y sabe que los cristianos cumplen lo que
prometen mejor que los moros. Alá y Marién, su madre, sean en tu guarda,
señora mía.

»Escrito y cerrado este papel, aguardé dos días a que estuviese el baño
solo, como solía, y luego salí al paso acostumbrado del terradillo, por ver
si la caña parecía, que no tardó mucho en asomar. Así como la vi, aunque no
podía ver quién la ponía, mostré el papel, como dando a entender que
pusiesen el hilo, pero ya venía puesto en la caña, al cual até el papel, y
de allí a poco tornó a parecer nuestra estrella, con la blanca bandera de
paz del atadillo. Dejáronla caer, y alcé yo, y hallé en el paño, en toda
suerte de moneda de plata y de oro, más de cincuenta escudos, los cuales
cincuenta veces más doblaron nuestro contento y confirmaron la esperanza de
tener libertad.

»Aquella misma noche volvió nuestro renegado, y nos dijo que había sabido
que en aquella casa vivía el mesmo moro que a nosotros nos habían dicho que
se llamaba Agi Morato, riquísimo por todo estremo, el cual tenía una sola
hija, heredera de toda su hacienda, y que era común opinión en toda la
ciudad ser la más hermosa mujer de la Berbería; y que muchos de los
virreyes que allí venían la habían pedido por mujer, y que ella nunca se
había querido casar; y que también supo que tuvo una cristiana cautiva, que
ya se había muerto; todo lo cual concertaba con lo que venía en el papel.
Entramos luego en consejo con el renegado, en qué orden se tendría para
sacar a la mora y venirnos todos a tierra de cristianos, y, en fin, se
acordó por entonces que esperásemos el aviso segundo de Zoraida, que así se
llamaba la que ahora quiere llamarse María; porque bien vimos que ella, y
no otra alguna era la que había de dar medio a todas aquellas dificultades.
Después que quedamos en esto, dijo el renegado que no tuviésemos pena, que
él perdería la vida o nos pondría en libertad.

»Cuatro días estuvo el baño con gente, que fue ocasión que cuatro días
tardase en parecer la caña; al cabo de los cuales, en la acostumbrada
soledad del baño, pareció con el lienzo tan preñado, que un felicísimo
parto prometía. Inclinóse a mí la caña y el lienzo, hallé en él otro papel
y cien escudos de oro, sin otra moneda alguna. Estaba allí el renegado,
dímosle a leer el papel dentro de nuestro rancho, el cual dijo que así
decía:

Yo no sé, mi señor, cómo dar orden que nos vamos a España, ni Lela Marién
me lo ha dicho, aunque yo se lo he preguntado. Lo que se podrá hacer es que
yo os daré por esta ventana muchísimos dineros de oro: rescataos vos con
ellos y vuestros amigos, y vaya uno en tierra de cristianos, y compre allá
una barca y vuelva por los demás; y a mí me hallarán en el jardín de mi
padre, que está a la puerta de Babazón, junto a la marina, donde tengo de
estar todo este verano con mi padre y con mis criados. De allí, de noche,
me podréis sacar sin miedo y llevarme a la barca; y mira que has de ser mi
marido, porque si no, yo pediré a Marién que te castigue. Si no te fías de
nadie que vaya por la barca, rescátate tú y ve, que yo sé que volverás
mejor que otro, pues eres caballero y cristiano. Procura saber el jardín, y
cuando te pasees por ahí sabré que está solo el baño, y te daré mucho
dinero. Alá te guarde, señor mío.

»Esto decía y contenía el segundo papel. Lo cual visto por todos, cada uno
se ofreció a querer ser el rescatado, y prometió de ir y volver con toda
puntualidad, y también yo me ofrecí a lo mismo; a todo lo cual se opuso el
renegado, diciendo que en ninguna manera consentiría que ninguno saliese de
libertad hasta que fuesen todos juntos, porque la experiencia le había
mostrado cuán mal cumplían los libres las palabras que daban en el
cautiverio; porque muchas veces habían usado de aquel remedio algunos
principales cautivos, rescatando a uno que fuese a Valencia, o Mallorca,
con dineros para poder armar una barca y volver por los que le habían
rescatado, y nunca habían vuelto; porque la libertad alcanzada y el temor
de no volver a perderla les borraba de la memoria todas las obligaciones
del mundo. Y, en confirmación de la verdad que nos decía, nos contó
brevemente un caso que casi en aquella mesma sazón había acaecido a unos
caballeros cristianos, el más estraño que jamás sucedió en aquellas partes,
donde a cada paso suceden cosas de grande espanto y de admiración.

»En efecto, él vino a decir que lo que se podía y debía hacer era que el
dinero que se había de dar para rescatar al cristiano, que se le diese a él
para comprar allí en Argel una barca, con achaque de hacerse mercader y
tratante en Tetuán y en aquella costa; y que, siendo él señor de la barca,
fácilmente se daría traza para sacarlos del baño y embarcarlos a todos.
Cuanto más, que si la mora, como ella decía, daba dineros para rescatarlos
a todos, que, estando libres, era facilísima cosa aun embarcarse en la
mitad del día; y que la dificultad que se ofrecía mayor era que los moros
no consienten que renegado alguno compre ni tenga barca, si no es bajel
grande para ir en corso, porque se temen que el que compra barca,
principalmente si es español, no la quiere sino para irse a tierra de
cristianos; pero que él facilitaría este inconveniente con hacer que un
moro tagarino fuese a la parte con él en la compañía de la barca y en la
ganancia de las mercancías, y con esta sombra él vendría a ser señor de la
barca, con que daba por acabado todo lo demás.

»Y, puesto que a mí y a mis camaradas nos había parecido mejor lo de enviar
por la barca a Mallorca, como la mora decía, no osamos contradecirle,
temerosos que, si no hacíamos lo que él decía, nos había de descubrir y
poner a peligro de perder las vidas, si descubriese el trato de Zoraida,
por cuya vida diéramos todos las nuestras. Y así, determinamos de ponernos
en las manos de Dios y en las del renegado, y en aquel mismo punto se le
respondió a Zoraida, diciéndole que haríamos todo cuanto nos aconsejaba,
porque lo había advertido tan bien como si Lela Marién se lo hubiera dicho,
y que en ella sola estaba dilatar aquel negocio, o ponello luego por obra.
Ofrecímele de nuevo de ser su esposo, y, con esto, otro día que acaeció a
estar solo el baño, en diversas veces, con la caña y el paño, nos dio dos
mil escudos de oro, y un papel donde decía que el primer jumá, que es el
viernes, se iba al jardín de su padre, y que antes que se fuese nos daría
más dinero, y que si aquello no bastase, que se lo avisásemos, que nos
daría cuanto le pidiésemos: que su padre tenía tantos, que no lo echaría
menos, cuanto más, que ella tenía la llaves de todo.

»Dimos luego quinientos escudos al renegado para comprar la barca; con
ochocientos me rescaté yo, dando el dinero a un mercader valenciano que a
la sazón se hallaba en Argel, el cual me rescató del rey, tomándome sobre
su palabra, dándola de que con el primer bajel que viniese de Valencia
pagaría mi rescate; porque si luego diera el dinero, fuera dar sospechas al
rey que había muchos días que mi rescate estaba en Argel, y que el
mercader, por sus granjerías, lo había callado. Finalmente, mi amo era tan
caviloso que en ninguna manera me atreví a que luego se desembolsase el
dinero. El jueves antes del viernes que la hermosa Zoraida se había de ir
al jardín, nos dio otros mil escudos y nos avisó de su partida, rogándome
que, si me rescatase, supiese luego el jardín de su padre, y que en todo
caso buscase ocasión de ir allá y verla. Respondíle en breves palabras que
así lo haría, y que tuviese cuidado de encomendarnos a Lela Marién, con
todas aquellas oraciones que la cautiva le había enseñado.

»Hecho esto, dieron orden en que los tres compañeros nuestros se
rescatasen, por facilitar la salida del baño, y porque, viéndome a mí
rescatado, y a ellos no, pues había dinero, no se alborotasen y les
persuadiese el diablo que hiciesen alguna cosa en perjuicio de Zoraida;
que, puesto que el ser ellos quien eran me podía asegurar deste temor, con
todo eso, no quise poner el negocio en aventura, y así, los hice rescatar
por la misma orden que yo me rescaté, entregando todo el dinero al
mercader, para que, con certeza y seguridad, pudiese hacer la fianza; al
cual nunca descubrimos nuestro trato y secreto, por el peligro que había.





Capítulo XLI. Donde todavía prosigue el cautivo su suceso


»No se pasaron quince días, cuando ya nuestro renegado tenía comprada una
muy buena barca, capaz de más de treinta personas: y, para asegurar su
hecho y dalle color, quiso hacer, como hizo, un viaje a un lugar que se
llamaba Sargel, que está treinta leguas de Argel hacia la parte de Orán, en
el cual hay mucha contratación de higos pasos. Dos o tres veces hizo este
viaje, en compañía del tagarino que había dicho. Tagarinos llaman en
Berbería a los moros de Aragón, y a los de Granada, mudéjares; y en el
reino de Fez llaman a los mudéjares elches, los cuales son la gente de
quien aquel rey más se sirve en la guerra.

»Digo, pues, que cada vez que pasaba con su barca daba fondo en una caleta
que estaba no dos tiros de ballesta del jardín donde Zoraida esperaba; y
allí, muy de propósito, se ponía el renegado con los morillos que bogaban
el remo, o ya a hacer la zalá, o a como por ensayarse de burlas a lo que
pensaba hacer de veras; y así, se iba al jardín de Zoraida y le pedía
fruta, y su padre se la daba sin conocelle; y, aunque él quisiera hablar a
Zoraida, como él después me dijo, y decille que él era el que por orden mía
le había de llevar a tierra de cristianos, que estuviese contenta y segura,
nunca le fue posible, porque las moras no se dejan ver de ningún moro ni
turco, si no es que su marido o su padre se lo manden. De cristianos
cautivos se dejan tratar y comunicar, aun más de aquello que sería
razonable; y a mí me hubiera pesado que él la hubiera hablado, que quizá la
alborotara, viendo que su negocio andaba en boca de renegados. Pero Dios,
que lo ordenaba de otra manera, no dio lugar al buen deseo que nuestro
renegado tenía; el cual, viendo cuán seguramente iba y venía a Sargel, y
que daba fondo cuando y como y adonde quería, y que el tagarino, su
compañero, no tenía más voluntad de lo que la suya ordenaba, y que yo
estaba ya rescatado, y que sólo faltaba buscar algunos cristianos que
bogasen el remo, me dijo que mirase yo cuáles quería traer conmigo, fuera
de los rescatados, y que los tuviese hablados para el primer viernes, donde
tenía determinado que fuese nuestra partida. Viendo esto, hablé a doce
españoles, todos valientes hombres del remo, y de aquellos que más
libremente podían salir de la ciudad; y no fue poco hallar tantos en
aquella coyuntura, porque estaban veinte bajeles en corso, y se habían
llevado toda la gente de remo, y éstos no se hallaran, si no fuera que su
amo se quedó aquel verano sin ir en corso, a acabar una galeota que tenía
en astillero. A los cuales no les dije otra cosa, sino que el primer
viernes en la tarde se saliesen uno a uno, disimuladamente, y se fuesen la
vuelta del jardín de Agi Morato, y que allí me aguardasen hasta que yo
fuese. A cada uno di este aviso de por sí, con orden que, aunque allí
viesen a otros cristianos, no les dijesen sino que yo les había mandado
esperar en aquel lugar.

»Hecha esta diligencia, me faltaba hacer otra, que era la que más me
convenía: y era la de avisar a Zoraida en el punto que estaban los
negocios, para que estuviese apercebida y sobre aviso, que no se
sobresaltase si de improviso la asaltásemos antes del tiempo que ella podía
imaginar que la barca de cristianos podía volver. Y así, determiné de ir al
jardín y ver si podría hablarla; y, con ocasión de coger algunas yerbas, un
día, antes de mi partida, fui allá, y la primera persona con quién encontré
fue con su padre, el cual me dijo, en lengua que en toda la Berbería, y aun
en Costantinopla, se halla entre cautivos y moros, que ni es morisca, ni
castellana, ni de otra nación alguna, sino una mezcla de todas las lenguas
con la cual todos nos entendemos; digo, pues, que en esta manera de
lenguaje me preguntó que qué buscaba en aquel su jardín, y de quién era.
Respondíle que era esclavo de Arnaúte Mamí (y esto, porque sabía yo por muy
cierto que era un grandísimo amigo suyo), y que buscaba de todas yerbas,
para hacer ensalada. Preguntóme, por el consiguiente, si era hombre de
rescate o no, y que cuánto pedía mi amo por mí. Estando en todas estas
preguntas y respuestas, salió de la casa del jardín la bella Zoraida, la
cual ya había mucho que me había visto; y, como las moras en ninguna manera
hacen melindre de mostrarse a los cristianos, ni tampoco se esquivan, como
ya he dicho, no se le dio nada de venir adonde su padre conmigo estaba;
antes, luego cuando su padre vio que venía, y de espacio, la llamó y mandó
que llegase.

»Demasiada cosa sería decir yo agora la mucha hermosura, la gentileza, el
gallardo y rico adorno con que mi querida Zoraida se mostró a mis ojos:
sólo diré que más perlas pendían de su hermosísimo cuello, orejas y
cabellos, que cabellos tenía en la cabeza. En las gargantas de los sus
pies, que descubiertas, a su usanza, traía, traía dos carcajes (que así se
llamaban las manillas o ajorcas de los pies en morisco) de purísimo oro,
con tantos diamantes engastados, que ella me dijo después que su padre los
estimaba en diez mil doblas, y las que traía en las muñecas de las manos
valían otro tanto. Las perlas eran en gran cantidad y muy buenas, porque la
mayor gala y bizarría de las moras es adornarse de ricas perlas y aljófar,
y así, hay más perlas y aljófar entre moros que entre todas las demás
naciones; y el padre de Zoraida tenía fama de tener muchas y de las mejores
que en Argel había, y de tener asimismo más de docientos mil escudos
españoles, de todo lo cual era señora esta que ahora lo es mía. Si con todo
este adorno podía venir entonces hermosa, o no, por las reliquias que le
han quedado en tantos trabajos se podrá conjeturar cuál debía de ser en las
prosperidades. Porque ya se sabe que la hermosura de algunas mujeres tiene
días y sazones, y requiere accidentes para diminuirse o acrecentarse; y es
natural cosa que las pasiones del ánimo la levanten o abajen, puesto que
las más veces la destruyen.

»Digo, en fin, que entonces llegó en todo estremo aderezada y en todo
estremo hermosa, o, a lo menos, a mí me pareció serlo la más que hasta
entonces había visto; y con esto, viendo las obligaciones en que me había
puesto, me parecía que tenía delante de mí una deidad del cielo, venida a
la tierra para mi gusto y para mi remedio. Así como ella llegó, le dijo su
padre en su lengua como yo era cautivo de su amigo Arnaúte Mamí, y que
venía a buscar ensalada. Ella tomó la mano, y en aquella mezcla de lenguas
que tengo dicho me preguntó si era caballero y qué era la causa que no me
rescataba. Yo le respondí que ya estaba rescatado, y que en el precio podía
echar de ver en lo que mi amo me estimaba, pues había dado por mí mil y
quinientos zoltanís. A lo cual ella respondió: ''En verdad que si tú fueras
de mi padre, que yo hiciera que no te diera él por otros dos tantos, porque
vosotros, cristianos, siempre mentís en cuanto decís, y os hacéis pobres
por engañar a los moros''. ''Bien podría ser eso, señora -le respondí-, mas
en verdad que yo la he tratado con mi amo, y la trato y la trataré con
cuantas personas hay en el mundo''. ''Y ¿cuándo te vas?'', dijo Zoraida.
''Mañana, creo yo -dije-, porque está aquí un bajel de Francia que se hace
mañana a la vela, y pienso irme en él''. ''¿No es mejor -replicó Zoraida-,
esperar a que vengan bajeles de España, y irte con ellos, que no con los de
Francia, que no son vuestros amigos?'' ''No -respondí yo-, aunque si como
hay nuevas que viene ya un bajel de España, es verdad, todavía yo le
aguardaré, puesto que es más cierto el partirme mañana; porque el deseo que
tengo de verme en mi tierra, y con las personas que bien quiero, es tanto
que no me dejará esperar otra comodidad, si se tarda, por mejor que sea''.
''Debes de ser, sin duda, casado en tu tierra -dijo Zoraida-, y por eso
deseas ir a verte con tu mujer''. ''No soy -respondí yo- casado, mas tengo
dada la palabra de casarme en llegando allá''. ''Y ¿es hermosa la dama a
quien se la diste?'', dijo Zoraida. ''Tan hermosa es -respondí yo- que para
encarecella y decirte la verdad, te parece a ti mucho''. Desto se riyó muy
de veras su padre, y dijo: ''Gualá, cristiano, que debe de ser muy hermosa
si se parece a mi hija, que es la más hermosa de todo este reino. Si no,
mírala bien, y verás cómo te digo verdad''. Servíanos de intérprete a las
más de estas palabras y razones el padre de Zoraida, como más ladino; que,
aunque ella hablaba la bastarda lengua que, como he dicho, allí se usa, más
declaraba su intención por señas que por palabras.

»Estando en estas y otras muchas razones, llegó un moro corriendo, y dijo,
a grandes voces, que por las bardas o paredes del jardín habían saltado
cuatro turcos, y andaban cogiendo la fruta, aunque no estaba madura.
Sobresaltóse el viejo, y lo mesmo hizo Zoraida, porque es común y casi
natural el miedo que los moros a los turcos tienen, especialmente a los
soldados, los cuales son tan insolentes y tienen tanto imperio sobre los
moros que a ellos están sujetos, que los tratan peor que si fuesen esclavos
suyos. Digo, pues, que dijo su padre a Zoraida: ''Hija, retírate a la casa
y enciérrate, en tanto que yo voy a hablar a estos canes; y tú, cristiano,
busca tus yerbas, y vete en buen hora, y llévete Alá con bien a tu
tierra''. Yo me incliné, y él se fue a buscar los turcos, dejándome solo
con Zoraida, que comenzó a dar muestras de irse donde su padre la había
mandado. Pero, apenas él se encubrió con los árboles del jardín, cuando
ella, volviéndose a mí, llenos los ojos de lágrimas, me dijo: ''Ámexi,
cristiano, ámexi''; que quiere decir: "¿Vaste, cristiano, vaste?" Yo la
respondí: ''Señora, sí, pero no en ninguna manera sin ti: el primero jumá
me aguarda, y no te sobresaltes cuando nos veas; que sin duda alguna iremos
a tierra de cristianos''.

»Yo le dije esto de manera que ella me entendió muy bien a todas las
razones que entrambos pasamos; y, echándome un brazo al cuello, con
desmayados pasos comenzó a caminar hacia la casa; y quiso la suerte, que
pudiera ser muy mala si el cielo no lo ordenara de otra manera, que, yendo
los dos de la manera y postura que os he contado, con un brazo al cuello,
su padre, que ya volvía de hacer ir a los turcos, nos vio de la suerte y
manera que íbamos, y nosotros vimos que él nos había visto; pero Zoraida,
advertida y discreta, no quiso quitar el brazo de mi cuello, antes se llegó
más a mí y puso su cabeza sobre mi pecho, doblando un poco las rodillas,
dando claras señales y muestras que se desmayaba, y yo, ansimismo, di a
entender que la sostenía contra mi voluntad. Su padre llegó corriendo
adonde estábamos, y, viendo a su hija de aquella manera, le preguntó que
qué tenía; pero, como ella no le respondiese, dijo su padre: ''Sin duda
alguna que con el sobresalto de la entrada de estos canes se ha
desmayado''. Y, quitándola del mío, la arrimó a su pecho; y ella, dando un
suspiro y aún no enjutos los ojos de lágrimas, volvió a decir: ''Ámexi,
cristiano, ámexi'': "Vete, cristiano, vete". A lo que su padre respondió:
''No importa, hija, que el cristiano se vaya, que ningún mal te ha hecho, y
los turcos ya son idos. No te sobresalte cosa alguna, pues ninguna hay que
pueda darte pesadumbre, pues, como ya te he dicho, los turcos, a mi ruego,
se volvieron por donde entraron''. ''Ellos, señor, la sobresaltaron, como
has dicho -dije yo a su padre-; mas, pues ella dice que yo me vaya, no la
quiero dar pesadumbre: quédate en paz, y, con tu licencia, volveré, si
fuere menester, por yerbas a este jardín; que, según dice mi amo, en
ninguno las hay mejores para ensalada que en él''. ''Todas las que
quisieres podrás volver -respondió Agi Morato-, que mi hija no dice esto
porque tú ni ninguno de los cristianos la enojaban, sino que, por decir que
los turcos se fuesen, dijo que tú te fueses, o porque ya era hora que
buscases tus yerbas''.

»Con esto, me despedí al punto de entrambos; y ella, arrancándosele el
alma, al parecer, se fue con su padre; y yo, con achaque de buscar las
yerbas, rodeé muy bien y a mi placer todo el jardín: miré bien las entradas
y salidas, y la fortaleza de la casa, y la comodidad que se podía ofrecer
para facilitar todo nuestro negocio. Hecho esto, me vine y di cuenta de
cuanto había pasado al renegado y a mis compañeros; y ya no veía la hora de
verme gozar sin sobresalto del bien que en la hermosa y bella Zoraida la
suerte me ofrecía.

»En fin, el tiempo se pasó, y se llegó el día y plazo de nosotros tan
deseado; y, siguiendo todos el orden y parecer que, con discreta
consideración y largo discurso, muchas veces habíamos dado, tuvimos el buen
suceso que deseábamos; porque el viernes que se siguió al día que yo con
Zoraida hablé en el jardín, nuestro renegado, al anochecer, dio fondo con
la barca casi frontero de donde la hermosísima Zoraida estaba. Ya los
cristianos que habían de bogar el remo estaban prevenidos y escondidos por
diversas partes de todos aquellos alrededores. Todos estaban suspensos y
alborozados, aguardándome, deseosos ya de embestir con el bajel que a los
ojos tenían; porque ellos no sabían el concierto del renegado, sino que
pensaban que a fuerza de brazos habían de haber y ganar la libertad,
quitando la vida a los moros que dentro de la barca estaban.

»Sucedió, pues, que, así como yo me mostré y mis compañeros, todos los
demás escondidos que nos vieron se vinieron llegando a nosotros. Esto era
ya a tiempo que la ciudad estaba ya cerrada, y por toda aquella campaña
ninguna persona parecía. Como estuvimos juntos, dudamos si sería mejor ir
primero por Zoraida, o rendir primero a los moros bagarinos que bogaban el
remo en la barca. Y, estando en esta duda, llegó a nosotros nuestro
renegado diciéndonos que en qué nos deteníamos, que ya era hora, y que
todos sus moros estaban descuidados, y los más dellos durmiendo. Dijímosle
en lo que reparábamos, y él dijo que lo que más importaba era rendir
primero el bajel, que se podía hacer con grandísima facilidad y sin peligro
alguno, y que luego podíamos ir por Zoraida. Pareciónos bien a todos lo que
decía, y así, sin detenernos más, haciendo él la guía, llegamos al bajel,
y, saltando él dentro primero, metió mano a un alfanje, y dijo en morisco:
''Ninguno de vosotros se mueva de aquí, si no quiere que le cueste la
vida''. Ya, a este tiempo, habían entrado dentro casi todos los cristianos.
Los moros, que eran de poco ánimo, viendo hablar de aquella manera a su
arráez, quedáronse espantados, y sin ninguno de todos ellos echar mano a
las armas, que pocas o casi ningunas tenían, se dejaron, sin hablar alguna
palabra, maniatar de los cristianos, los cuales con mucha presteza lo
hicieron, amenazando a los moros que si alzaban por alguna vía o manera la
voz, que luego al punto los pasarían todos a cuchillo.

»Hecho ya esto, quedándose en guardia dellos la mitad de los nuestros, los
que quedábamos, haciéndonos asimismo el renegado la guía, fuimos al jardín
de Agi Morato, y quiso la buena suerte que, llegando a abrir la puerta, se
abrió con tanta facilidad como si cerrada no estuviera; y así, con gran
quietud y silencio, llegamos a la casa sin ser sentidos de nadie. Estaba la
bellísima Zoraida aguardándonos a una ventana, y, así como sintió gente,
preguntó con voz baja si éramos nizarani, como si dijera o preguntara si
éramos cristianos. Yo le respondí que sí, y que bajase. Cuando ella me
conoció, no se detuvo un punto, porque, sin responderme palabra, bajó en un
instante, abrió la puerta y mostróse a todos tan hermosa y ricamente
vestida que no lo acierto a encarecer. Luego que yo la vi, le tomé una
mano y la comencé a besar, y el renegado hizo lo mismo, y mis dos
camaradas; y los demás, que el caso no sabían, hicieron lo que vieron que
nosotros hacíamos, que no parecía sino que le dábamos las gracias y la
reconocíamos por señora de nuestra libertad. El renegado le dijo en lengua
morisca si estaba su padre en el jardín. Ella respondió que sí y que
dormía. ''Pues será menester despertalle -replicó el renegado-, y
llevárnosle con nosotros, y todo aquello que tiene de valor este hermoso
jardín.'' ''No -dijo ella-, a mi padre no se ha de tocar en ningún modo, y
en esta casa no hay otra cosa que lo que yo llevo, que es tanto, que bien
habrá para que todos quedéis ricos y contentos; y esperaros un poco y lo
veréis''. Y, diciendo esto, se volvió a entrar, diciendo que muy presto
volvería; que nos estuviésemos quedos, sin hacer ningún ruido. Preguntéle
al renegado lo que con ella había pasado, el cual me lo contó, a quien yo
dije que en ninguna cosa se había de hacer más de lo que Zoraida quisiese;
la cual ya que volvía cargada con un cofrecillo lleno de escudos de oro,
tantos, que apenas lo podía sustentar, quiso la mala suerte que su padre
despertase en el ínterin y sintiese el ruido que andaba en el jardín; y,
asomándose a la ventana, luego conoció que todos los que en él estaban eran
cristianos; y, dando muchas, grandes y desaforadas voces, comenzó a decir
en arábigo: ''¡Cristianos, cristianos! ¡Ladrones, ladrones!''; por los
cuales gritos nos vimos todos puestos en grandísima y temerosa confusión.
Pero el renegado, viendo el peligro en que estábamos, y lo mucho que le
importaba salir con aquella empresa antes de ser sentido, con grandísima
presteza, subió donde Agi Morato estaba, y juntamente con él fueron algunos
de nosotros; que yo no osé desamparar a la Zoraida, que como desmayada se
había dejado caer en mis brazos. En resolución, los que subieron se dieron
tan buena maña que en un momento bajaron con Agi Morato, trayéndole atadas
las manos y puesto un pañizuelo en la boca, que no le dejaba hablar
palabra, amenazándole que el hablarla le había de costar la vida. Cuando su
hija le vio, se cubrió los ojos por no verle, y su padre quedó espantado,
ignorando cuán de su voluntad se había puesto en nuestras manos. Mas,
entonces siendo más necesarios los pies, con diligencia y presteza nos
pusimos en la barca; que ya los que en ella habían quedado nos esperaban,
temerosos de algún mal suceso nuestro.

»Apenas serían dos horas pasadas de la noche, cuando ya estábamos todos en
la barca, en la cual se le quitó al padre de Zoraida la atadura de las
manos y el paño de la boca; pero tornóle a decir el renegado que no hablase
palabra, que le quitarían la vida. Él, como vio allí a su hija, comenzó a
suspirar ternísimamente, y más cuando vio que yo estrechamente la tenía
abrazada, y que ella sin defender, quejarse ni esquivarse, se estaba queda;
pero, con todo esto, callaba, porque no pusiesen en efeto las muchas
amenazas que el renegado le hacía. Viéndose, pues, Zoraida ya en la barca,
y que queríamos dar los remos al agua, y viendo allí a su padre y a los
demás moros que atados estaban, le dijo al renegado que me dijese le
hiciese merced de soltar a aquellos moros y de dar libertad a su padre,
porque antes se arrojaría en la mar que ver delante de sus ojos y por causa
suya llevar cautivo a un padre que tanto la había querido. El renegado me
lo dijo; y yo respondí que era muy contento; pero él respondió que no
convenía, a causa que, si allí los dejaban apellidarían luego la tierra y
alborotarían la ciudad, y serían causa que saliesen a buscallos con algunas
fragatas ligeras, y les tomasen la tierra y la mar, de manera que no
pudiésemos escaparnos; que lo que se podría hacer era darles libertad en
llegando a la primera tierra de cristianos. En este parecer venimos todos,
y Zoraida, a quien se le dio cuenta, con las causas que nos movían a no
hacer luego lo que quería, también se satisfizo; y luego, con regocijado
silencio y alegre diligencia, cada uno de nuestros valientes remeros tomó
su remo, y comenzamos, encomendándonos a Dios de todo corazón, a navegar la
vuelta de las islas de Mallorca, que es la tierra de cristianos más cerca.

»Pero, a causa de soplar un poco el viento tramontana y estar la mar algo
picada, no fue posible seguir la derrota de Mallorca, y fuenos forzoso
dejarnos ir tierra a tierra la vuelta de Orán, no sin mucha pesadumbre
nuestra, por no ser descubiertos del lugar de Sargel, que en aquella costa
cae sesenta millas de Argel. Y, asimismo, temíamos encontrar por aquel
paraje alguna galeota de las que de ordinario vienen con mercancía de
Tetuán, aunque cada uno por sí, y todos juntos, presumíamos de que, si se
encontraba galeota de mercancía, como no fuese de las que andan en corso,
que no sólo no nos perderíamos, mas que tomaríamos bajel donde con más
seguridad pudiésemos acabar nuestro viaje. Iba Zoraida, en tanto que se
navegaba, puesta la cabeza entre mis manos, por no ver a su padre, y sentía
yo que iba llamando a Lela Marién que nos ayudase.

»Bien habríamos navegado treinta millas, cuando nos amaneció, como tres
tiros de arcabuz desviados de tierra, toda la cual vimos desierta y sin
nadie que nos descubriese; pero, con todo eso, nos fuimos a fuerza de
brazos entrando un poco en la mar, que ya estaba algo más sosegada; y,
habiendo entrado casi dos leguas, diose orden que se bogase a cuarteles en
tanto que comíamos algo, que iba bien proveída la barca, puesto que los que
bogaban dijeron que no era aquél tiempo de tomar reposo alguno, que les
diesen de comer los que no bogaban, que ellos no querían soltar los remos
de las manos en manera alguna. Hízose ansí, y en esto comenzó a soplar un
viento largo, que nos obligó a hacer luego vela y a dejar el remo, y
enderezar a Orán, por no ser posible poder hacer otro viaje. Todo se hizo
con muchísima presteza; y así, a la vela, navegamos por más de ocho millas
por hora, sin llevar otro temor alguno sino el de encontrar con bajel que
de corso fuese.

»Dimos de comer a los moros bagarinos, y el renegado les consoló
diciéndoles como no iban cautivos, que en la primera ocasión les darían
libertad. Lo mismo se le dijo al padre de Zoraida, el cual respondió:
''Cualquiera otra cosa pudiera yo esperar y creer de vuestra liberalidad y
buen término, ¡oh cristianos!, mas el darme libertad, no me tengáis por tan
simple que lo imagine; que nunca os pusistes vosotros al peligro de
quitármela para volverla tan liberalmente, especialmente sabiendo quién soy
yo, y el interese que se os puede seguir de dármela; el cual interese, si
le queréis poner nombre, desde aquí os ofrezco todo aquello que quisiéredes
por mí y por esa desdichada hija mía, o si no, por ella sola, que es la
mayor y la mejor parte de mi alma''. En diciendo esto, comenzó a llorar tan
amargamente que a todos nos movió a compasión, y forzó a Zoraida que le
mirase; la cual, viéndole llorar, así se enterneció que se levantó de mis
pies y fue a abrazar a su padre, y, juntando su rostro con el suyo,
comenzaron los dos tan tierno llanto que muchos de los que allí íbamos le
acompañamos en él. Pero, cuando su padre la vio adornada de fiesta y con
tantas joyas sobre sí, le dijo en su lengua: ''¿Qué es esto, hija, que ayer
al anochecer, antes que nos sucediese esta terrible desgracia en que nos
vemos, te vi con tus ordinarios y caseros vestidos, y agora, sin que hayas
tenido tiempo de vestirte y sin haberte dado alguna nueva alegre de
solenizalle con adornarte y pulirte, te veo compuesta con los mejores
vestidos que yo supe y pude darte cuando nos fue la ventura más favorable?
Respóndeme a esto, que me tiene más suspenso y admirado que la misma
desgracia en que me hallo''.

»Todo lo que el moro decía a su hija nos lo declaraba el renegado, y ella
no le respondía palabra. Pero, cuando él vio a un lado de la barca el
cofrecillo donde ella solía tener sus joyas, el cual sabía él bien que le
había dejado en Argel, y no traídole al jardín, quedó más confuso, y
preguntóle que cómo aquel cofre había venido a nuestras manos, y qué era lo
que venía dentro. A lo cual el renegado, sin aguardar que Zoraida le
respondiese, le respondió: ''No te canses, señor, en preguntar a Zoraida,
tu hija, tantas cosas, porque con una que yo te responda te satisfaré a
todas; y así, quiero que sepas que ella es cristiana, y es la que ha sido
la lima de nuestras cadenas y la libertad de nuestro cautiverio; ella va
aquí de su voluntad, tan contenta, a lo que yo imagino, de verse en este
estado, como el que sale de las tinieblas a la luz, de la muerte a la vida
y de la pena a la gloria''. ''¿Es verdad lo que éste dice, hija?'', dijo el
moro. ''Así es'', respondió Zoraida. ''¿Que, en efeto -replicó el viejo-,
tú eres cristiana, y la que ha puesto a su padre en poder de sus
enemigos?'' A lo cual respondió Zoraida: ''La que es cristiana yo soy, pero
no la que te ha puesto en este punto, porque nunca mi deseo se estendió a
dejarte ni a hacerte mal, sino a hacerme a mí bien''. ''Y ¿qué bien es el
que te has hecho, hija?'' ''Eso -respondió ella- pregúntaselo tú a Lela
Marién, que ella te lo sabrá decir mejor que no yo''.

»Apenas hubo oído esto el moro, cuando, con una increíble presteza, se
arrojó de cabeza en la mar, donde sin ninguna duda se ahogara, si el
vestido largo y embarazoso que traía no le entretuviera un poco sobre el
agua. Dio voces Zoraida que le sacasen, y así, acudimos luego todos, y,
asiéndole de la almalafa, le sacamos medio ahogado y sin sentido, de que
recibió tanta pena Zoraida que, como si fuera ya muerto, hacía sobre él un
tierno y doloroso llanto. Volvímosle boca abajo, volvió mucha agua, tornó
en sí al cabo de dos horas, en las cuales, habiéndose trocado el viento,
nos convino volver hacia tierra, y hacer fuerza de remos, por no embestir
en ella; mas quiso nuestra buena suerte que llegamos a una cala que se hace
al lado de un pequeño promontorio o cabo que de los moros es llamado el de
La Cava Rumía, que en nuestra lengua quiere decir La mala mujer cristiana;
y es tradición entre los moros que en aquel lugar está enterrada la Cava,
por quien se perdió España, porque cava en su lengua quiere decir mujer
mala, y rumía, cristiana; y aun tienen por mal agüero llegar allí a dar
fondo cuando la necesidad les fuerza a ello, porque nunca le dan sin ella;
puesto que para nosotros no fue abrigo de mala mujer, sino puerto seguro de
nuestro remedio, según andaba alterada la mar.

»Pusimos nuestras centinelas en tierra, y no dejamos jamás los remos de la
mano; comimos de lo que el renegado había proveído, y rogamos a Dios y a
Nuestra Señora, de todo nuestro corazón, que nos ayudase y favoreciese para
que felicemente diésemos fin a tan dichoso principio. Diose orden, a
suplicación de Zoraida, como echásemos en tierra a su padre y a todos los
demás moros que allí atados venían, porque no le bastaba el ánimo, ni lo
podían sufrir sus blandas entrañas, ver delante de sus ojos atado a su
padre y aquellos de su tierra presos. Prometímosle de hacerlo así al tiempo
de la partida, pues no corría peligro el dejallos en aquel lugar, que era
despoblado. No fueron tan vanas nuestras oraciones que no fuesen oídas del
cielo; que, en nuestro favor, luego volvió el viento, tranquilo el mar,
convidándonos a que tornásemos alegres a proseguir nuestro comenzado viaje.

»Viendo esto, desatamos a los moros, y uno a uno los pusimos en tierra, de
lo que ellos se quedaron admirados; pero, llegando a desembarcar al padre
de Zoraida, que ya estaba en todo su acuerdo, dijo: ''¿Por qué pensáis,
cristianos, que esta mala hembra huelga de que me deis libertad? ¿Pensáis
que es por piedad que de mí tiene? No, por cierto, sino que lo hace por el
estorbo que le dará mi presencia cuando quiera poner en ejecución sus malos
deseos; ni penséis que la ha movido a mudar religión entender ella que la
vuestra a la nuestra se aventaja, sino el saber que en vuestra tierra se
usa la deshonestidad más libremente que en la nuestra''. Y, volviéndose a
Zoraida, teniéndole yo y otro cristiano de entrambos brazos asido, porque
algún desatino no hiciese, le dijo: ''¡Oh infame moza y mal aconsejada
muchacha! ¿Adónde vas, ciega y desatinada, en poder destos perros,
naturales enemigos nuestros? ¡Maldita sea la hora en que yo te engendré, y
malditos sean los regalos y deleites en que te he criado!'' Pero, viendo yo
que llevaba término de no acabar tan presto, di priesa a ponelle en tierra,
y desde allí, a voces, prosiguió en sus maldiciones y lamentos, rogando a
Mahoma rogase a Alá que nos destruyese, confundiese y acabase; y cuando,
por habernos hecho a la vela, no podimos oír sus palabras, vimos sus obras,
que eran arrancarse las barbas, mesarse los cabellos y arrastrarse por el
suelo; mas una vez esforzó la voz de tal manera que podimos entender que
decía: ''¡Vuelve, amada hija, vuelve a tierra, que todo te lo perdono;
entrega a esos hombres ese dinero, que ya es suyo, y vuelve a consolar a
este triste padre tuyo, que en esta desierta arena dejará la vida, si tú le
dejas!'' Todo lo cual escuchaba Zoraida, y todo lo sentía y lloraba, y no
supo decirle ni respondelle palabra, sino: ''Plega a Alá, padre mío, que
Lela Marién, que ha sido la causa de que yo sea cristiana, ella te consuele
en tu tristeza. Alá sabe bien que no pude hacer otra cosa de la que he
hecho, y que estos cristianos no deben nada a mi voluntad, pues, aunque
quisiera no venir con ellos y quedarme en mi casa, me fuera imposible,
según la priesa que me daba mi alma a poner por obra ésta que a mí me
parece tan buena como tú, padre amado, la juzgas por mala''. Esto dijo, a
tiempo que ni su padre la oía, ni nosotros ya le veíamos; y así, consolando
yo a Zoraida, atendimos todos a nuestro viaje, el cual nos le facilitaba el
proprio viento, de tal manera que bien tuvimos por cierto de vernos otro
día al amanecer en las riberas de España.

»Mas, como pocas veces, o nunca, viene el bien puro y sencillo, sin ser
acompañado o seguido de algún mal que le turbe o sobresalte, quiso nuestra
ventura, o quizá las maldiciones que el moro a su hija había echado, que
siempre se han de temer de cualquier padre que sean; quiso, digo, que
estando ya engolfados y siendo ya casi pasadas tres horas de la noche,
yendo con la vela tendida de alto baja, frenillados los remos, porque el
próspero viento nos quitaba del trabajo de haberlos menester, con la luz de
la luna, que claramente resplandecía, vimos cerca de nosotros un bajel
redondo, que, con todas las velas tendidas, llevando un poco a orza el
timón, delante de nosotros atravesaba; y esto tan cerca, que nos fue
forzoso amainar por no embestirle, y ellos, asimesmo, hicieron fuerza de
timón para darnos lugar que pasásemos.

»Habíanse puesto a bordo del bajel a preguntarnos quién éramos, y adónde
navegábamos, y de dónde veníamos; pero, por preguntarnos esto en lengua
francesa, dijo nuestro renegado: ''Ninguno responda; porque éstos, sin
duda, son cosarios franceses, que hacen a toda ropa''. Por este
advertimiento, ninguno respondió palabra; y, habiendo pasado un poco
delante, que ya el bajel quedaba sotavento, de improviso soltaron dos
piezas de artillería, y, a lo que parecía, ambas venían con cadenas, porque
con una cortaron nuestro árbol por medio, y dieron con él y con la vela en
la mar; y al momento, disparando otra pieza, vino a dar la bala en mitad de
nuestra barca, de modo que la abrió toda, sin hacer otro mal alguno; pero,
como nosotros nos vimos ir a fondo, comenzamos todos a grandes voces a
pedir socorro y a rogar a los del bajel que nos acogiesen, porque nos
anegábamos. Amainaron entonces, y, echando el esquife o barca a la mar,
entraron en él hasta doce franceses bien armados, con sus arcabuces y
cuerdas encendidas, y así llegaron junto al nuestro; y, viendo cuán pocos
éramos y cómo el bajel se hundía, nos recogieron, diciendo que, por haber
usado de la descortesía de no respondelles, nos había sucedido aquello.
Nuestro renegado tomó el cofre de las riquezas de Zoraida, y dio con él en
la mar, sin que ninguno echase de ver en lo que hacía. En resolución, todos
pasamos con los franceses, los cuales, después de haberse informado de todo
aquello que de nosotros saber quisieron, como si fueran nuestros capitales
enemigos, nos despojaron de todo cuanto teníamos, y a Zoraida le quitaron
hasta los carcajes que traía en los pies. Pero no me daba a mí tanta
pesadumbre la que a Zoraida daban, como me la daba el temor que tenía de
que habían de pasar del quitar de las riquísimas y preciosísimas joyas al
quitar de la joya que más valía y ella más estimaba. Pero los deseos de
aquella gente no se estienden a más que al dinero, y desto jamás se vee
harta su codicia; lo cual entonces llegó a tanto, que aun hasta los
vestidos de cautivos nos quitaran si de algún provecho les fueran. Y hubo
parecer entre ellos de que a todos nos arrojasen a la mar envueltos en una
vela, porque tenían intención de tratar en algunos puertos de España con
nombre de que eran bretones, y si nos llevaban vivos, serían castigados,
siendo descubierto su hurto. Mas el capitán, que era el que había despojado
a mi querida Zoraida, dijo que él se contentaba con la presa que tenía, y
que no quería tocar en ningún puerto de España, sino pasar el estrecho de
Gibraltar de noche, o como pudiese, y irse a la Rochela, de donde había
salido; y así, tomaron por acuerdo de darnos el esquife de su navío, y todo
lo necesario para la corta navegación que nos quedaba, como lo hicieron
otra día, ya a vista de tierra de España, con la cual vista, todas nuestras
pesadumbres y pobrezas se nos olvidaron de todo punto, como si no hubieran
pasado por nosotros: tanto es el gusto de alcanzar la libertad perdida.

»Cerca de mediodía podría ser cuando nos echaron en la barca, dándonos dos
barriles de agua y algún bizcocho; y el capitán, movido no sé de qué
misericordia, al embarcarse la hermosísima Zoraida, le dio hasta cuarenta
escudos de oro, y no consintió que le quitasen sus soldados estos mesmos
vestidos que ahora tiene puestos. Entramos en el bajel; dímosles las
gracias por el bien que nos hacían, mostrándonos más agradecidos que
quejosos; ellos se hicieron a lo largo, siguiendo la derrota del estrecho;
nosotros, sin mirar a otro norte que a la tierra que se nos mostraba
delante, nos dimos tanta priesa a bogar que al poner del sol estábamos tan
cerca que bien pudiéramos, a nuestro parecer, llegar antes que fuera muy
noche; pero, por no parecer en aquella noche la luna y el cielo mostrarse
escuro, y por ignorar el paraje en que estábamos, no nos pareció cosa
segura embestir en tierra, como a muchos de nosotros les parecía, diciendo
que diésemos en ella, aunque fuese en unas peñas y lejos de poblado, porque
así aseguraríamos el temor que de razón se debía tener que por allí
anduviesen bajeles de cosarios de Tetuán, los cuales anochecen en Berbería
y amanecen en las costas de España, y hacen de ordinario presa, y se
vuelven a dormir a sus casas. Pero, de los contrarios pareceres, el que se
tomó fue que nos llegásemos poco a poco, y que si el sosiego del mar lo
concediese, desembarcásemos donde pudiésemos.

»Hízose así, y poco antes de la media noche sería cuando llegamos al pie de
una disformísima y alta montaña, no tan junto al mar que no concediese un
poco de espacio para poder desembarcar cómodamente. Embestimos en la arena,
salimos a tierra, besamos el suelo, y, con lágrimas de muy alegrísimo
contento, dimos todos gracias a Dios, Señor Nuestro, por el bien tan
incomparable que nos había hecho. Sacamos de la barca los bastimentos que
tenía, tirámosla en tierra, y subímonos un grandísimo trecho en la montaña,
porque aún allí estábamos, y aún no podíamos asegurar el pecho, ni
acabábamos de creer que era tierra de cristianos la que ya nos sostenía.
Amaneció más tarde, a mi parecer, de lo que quisiéramos. Acabamos de
subir toda la montaña, por ver si desde allí algún poblado se descubría, o
algunas cabañas de pastores; pero, aunque más tendimos la vista, ni
poblado, ni persona, ni senda, ni camino descubrimos. Con todo esto,
determinamos de entrarnos la tierra adentro, pues no podría ser menos sino
que presto descubriésemos quien nos diese noticia della. Pero lo que a mí
más me fatigaba era el ver ir a pie a Zoraida por aquellas asperezas, que,
puesto que alguna vez la puse sobre mis hombros, más le cansaba a ella mi
cansancio que la reposaba su reposo; y así, nunca más quiso que yo aquel
trabajo tomase; y, con mucha paciencia y muestras de alegría, llevándola yo
siempre de la mano, poco menos de un cuarto de legua debíamos de haber
andado, cuando llegó a nuestros oídos el son de una pequeña esquila, señal
clara que por allí cerca había ganado; y, mirando todos con atención si
alguno se parecía, vimos al pie de un alcornoque un pastor mozo, que con
grande reposo y descuido estaba labrando un palo con un cuchillo. Dimos
voces, y él, alzando la cabeza, se puso ligeramente en pie, y, a lo que
después supimos, los primeros que a la vista se le ofrecieron fueron el
renegado y Zoraida, y, como él los vio en hábito de moros, pensó que todos
los de la Berbería estaban sobre él; y, metiéndose con estraña ligereza por
el bosque adelante, comenzó a dar los mayores gritos del mundo diciendo:
''¡Moros, moros hay en la tierra! ¡Moros, moros! ¡Arma, arma!''

»Con estas voces quedamos todos confusos, y no sabíamos qué hacernos; pero,
considerando que las voces del pastor habían de alborotar la tierra, y que
la caballería de la costa había de venir luego a ver lo que era, acordamos
que el renegado se desnudase las ropas del turco y se vistiese un
gilecuelco o casaca de cautivo que uno de nosotros le dio luego, aunque se
quedó en camisa; y así, encomendándonos a Dios, fuimos por el mismo camino
que vimos que el pastor llevaba, esperando siempre cuándo había de dar
sobre nosotros la caballería de la costa. Y no nos engañó nuestro
pensamiento, porque, aún no habrían pasado dos horas cuando, habiendo ya
salido de aquellas malezas a un llano, descubrimos hasta cincuenta
caballeros, que con gran ligereza, corriendo a media rienda, a nosotros se
venían, y así como los vimos, nos estuvimos quedos aguardándolos; pero,
como ellos llegaron y vieron, en lugar de los moros que buscaban, tanto
pobre cristiano, quedaron confusos, y uno dellos nos preguntó si éramos
nosotros acaso la ocasión por que un pastor había apellidado al arma.
''Sí'', dije yo; y, queriendo comenzar a decirle mi suceso, y de dónde
veníamos y quién éramos, uno de los cristianos que con nosotros venían
conoció al jinete que nos había hecho la pregunta, y dijo, sin dejarme a mí
decir más palabra: ''¡Gracias sean dadas a Dios, señores, que a tan buena
parte nos ha conducido!, porque, si yo no me engaño, la tierra que pisamos
es la de Vélez Málaga, si ya los años de mi cautiverio no me han quitado de
la memoria el acordarme que vos, señor, que nos preguntáis quién somos,
sois Pedro de Bustamante, tío mío''. Apenas hubo dicho esto el cristiano
cautivo, cuando el jinete se arrojó del caballo y vino a abrazar al mozo,
diciéndole: ''Sobrino de mi alma y de mi vida, ya te conozco, y ya te he
llorado por muerto yo, y mi hermana, tu madre, y todos los tuyos, que aún
viven; y Dios ha sido servido de darles vida para que gocen el placer de
verte: ya sabíamos que estabas en Argel, y por las señales y muestras de
tus vestidos, y la de todos los desta compañía, comprehendo que habéis
tenido milagrosa libertad''. ''Así es -respondió el mozo-, y tiempo nos
quedará para contároslo todo''.

»Luego que los jinetes entendieron que éramos cristianos cautivos, se
apearon de sus caballos, y cada uno nos convidaba con el suyo para
llevarnos a la ciudad de Vélez Málaga, que legua y media de allí estaba.
Algunos dellos volvieron a llevar la barca a la ciudad, diciéndoles dónde
la habíamos dejado; otros nos subieron a las ancas, y Zoraida fue en las
del caballo del tío del cristiano. Saliónos a recebir todo el pueblo, que
ya de alguno que se había adelantado sabían la nueva de nuestra venida. No
se admiraban de ver cautivos libres, ni moros cautivos, porque toda la
gente de aquella costa está hecha a ver a los unos y a los otros; pero
admirábanse de la hermosura de Zoraida, la cual en aquel instante y sazón
estaba en su punto, ansí con el cansancio del camino como con la alegría de
verse ya en tierra de cristianos, sin sobresalto de perderse; y esto le
había sacado al rostro tales colores que, si no es que la afición entonces
me engañaba, osaré decir que más hermosa criatura no había en el mundo; a
lo menos, que yo la hubiese visto.

»Fuimos derechos a la iglesia, a dar gracias a Dios por la merced recebida;
y, así como en ella entró Zoraida, dijo que allí había rostros que se
parecían a los de Lela Marién. Dijímosle que eran imágines suyas, y como
mejor se pudo le dio el renegado a entender lo que significaban, para que
ella las adorase como si verdaderamente fueran cada una dellas la misma
Lela Marién que la había hablado. Ella, que tiene buen entendimiento y un
natural fácil y claro, entendió luego cuanto acerca de las imágenes se le
dijo. Desde allí nos llevaron y repartieron a todos en diferentes casas del
pueblo; pero al renegado, Zoraida y a mí nos llevó el cristiano que vino
con nosotros, y en casa de sus padres, que medianamente eran acomodados de
los bienes de fortuna, y nos regalaron con tanto amor como a su mismo hijo.

»Seis días estuvimos en Vélez, al cabo de los cuales el renegado, hecha su
información de cuanto le convenía, se fue a la ciudad de Granada, a
reducirse por medio de la Santa Inquisición al gremio santísimo de la
Iglesia; los demás cristianos libertados se fueron cada uno donde mejor le
pareció; solos quedamos Zoraida y yo, con solos los escudos que la cortesía
del francés le dio a Zoraida, de los cuales compré este animal en que ella
viene; y, sirviéndola yo hasta agora de padre y escudero, y no de esposo,
vamos con intención de ver si mi padre es vivo, o si alguno de mis hermanos
ha tenido más próspera ventura que la mía, puesto que, por haberme hecho el
cielo compañero de Zoraida, me parece que ninguna otra suerte me pudiera
venir, por buena que fuera, que más la estimara. La paciencia con que
Zoraida lleva las incomodidades que la pobreza trae consigo, y el deseo que
muestra tener de verse ya cristiana es tanto y tal, que me admira y me
mueve a servirla todo el tiempo de mi vida, puesto que el gusto que tengo
de verme suyo y de que ella sea mía me lo turba y deshace no saber si
hallaré en mi tierra algún rincón donde recogella, y si habrán hecho el
tiempo y la muerte tal mudanza en la hacienda y vida de mi padre y hermanos
que apenas halle quien me conozca, si ellos faltan.» No tengo más, señores,
que deciros de mi historia; la cual, si es agradable y peregrina, júzguenlo
vuestros buenos entendimientos; que de mí sé decir que quisiera habérosla
contado más brevemente, puesto que el temor de enfadaros más de cuatro
circustancias me ha quitado de la lengua.





Capítulo XLII. Que trata de lo que más sucedió en la venta y de otras
muchas cosas dignas de saberse


Calló, en diciendo esto, el cautivo, a quien don Fernando dijo:

-Por cierto, señor capitán, el modo con que habéis contado este estraño
suceso ha sido tal, que iguala a la novedad y estrañeza del mesmo caso.
Todo es peregrino y raro, y lleno de accidentes que maravillan y suspenden
a quien los oye; y es de tal manera el gusto que hemos recebido en
escuchalle, que, aunque nos hallara el día de mañana entretenidos en el
mesmo cuento, holgáramos que de nuevo se comenzara.

Y, en diciendo esto, don Fernando y todos los demás se le ofrecieron, con
todo lo a ellos posible para servirle, con palabras y razones tan amorosas
y tan verdaderas que el capitán se tuvo por bien satisfecho de sus
voluntades. Especialmente, le ofreció don Fernando que si quería volverse
con él, que él haría que el marqués, su hermano, fuese padrino del bautismo
de Zoraida, y que él, por su parte, le acomodaría de manera que pudiese
entrar en su tierra con el autoridad y cómodo que a su persona se debía.
Todo lo agradeció cortesísimamente el cautivo, pero no quiso acetar ninguno
de sus liberales ofrecimientos.

En esto, llegaba ya la noche, y, al cerrar della, llegó a la venta un
coche, con algunos hombres de a caballo. Pidieron posada; a quien la
ventera respondió que no había en toda la venta un palmo desocupado.

-Pues, aunque eso sea -dijo uno de los de a caballo que habían entrado-, no
ha de faltar para el señor oidor que aquí viene.

A este nombre se turbó la güéspeda, y dijo:

-Señor, lo que en ello hay es que no tengo camas: si es que su merced del
señor oidor la trae, que sí debe de traer, entre en buen hora, que yo y mi
marido nos saldremos de nuestro aposento por acomodar a su merced.

-Sea en buen hora -dijo el escudero.

Pero, a este tiempo, ya había salido del coche un hombre, que en el traje
mostró luego el oficio y cargo que tenía, porque la ropa luenga, con las
mangas arrocadas, que vestía, mostraron ser oidor, como su criado había
dicho. Traía de la mano a una doncella, al parecer de hasta diez y seis
años, vestida de camino, tan bizarra, tan hermosa y tan gallarda que a
todos puso en admiración su vista; de suerte que, a no haber visto a
Dorotea y a Luscinda y Zoraida, que en la venta estaban, creyeran que otra
tal hermosura como la desta doncella difícilmente pudiera hallarse. Hallóse
don Quijote al entrar del oidor y de la doncella, y, así como le vio, dijo:

-Seguramente puede vuestra merced entrar y espaciarse en este castillo,
que, aunque es estrecho y mal acomodado, no hay estrecheza ni incomodidad
en el mundo que no dé lugar a las armas y a las letras, y más si las armas
y letras traen por guía y adalid a la fermosura, como la traen las letras
de vuestra merced en esta fermosa doncella, a quien deben no sólo abrirse y
manifestarse los castillos, sino apartarse los riscos, y devidirse y
abajarse las montañas, para dalle acogida. Entre vuestra merced, digo, en
este paraíso, que aquí hallará estrellas y soles que acompañen el cielo que
vuestra merced trae consigo; aquí hallará las armas en su punto y la
hermosura en su estremo.

Admirado quedó el oidor del razonamiento de don Quijote, a quien se puso a
mirar muy de propósito, y no menos le admiraba su talle que sus palabras;
y, sin hallar ningunas con que respondelle, se tornó a admirar de nuevo
cuando vio delante de sí a Luscinda, Dorotea y a Zoraida, que, a las nuevas
de los nuevos güéspedes y a las que la ventera les había dado de la
hermosura de la doncella, habían venido a verla y a recebirla. Pero don
Fernando, Cardenio y el cura le hicieron más llanos y más cortesanos
ofrecimientos. En efecto, el señor oidor entró confuso, así de lo que veía
como de lo que escuchaba, y las hermosas de la venta dieron la bienllegada
a la hermosa doncella.

En resolución, bien echó de ver el oidor que era gente principal toda la
que allí estaba; pero el talle, visaje y la apostura de don Quijote le
desatinaba; y, habiendo pasado entre todos corteses ofrecimientos y
tanteado la comodidad de la venta, se ordenó lo que antes estaba ordenado:
que todas las mujeres se entrasen en el camaranchón ya referido, y que los
hombres se quedasen fuera, como en su guarda. Y así, fue contento el oidor
que su hija, que era la doncella, se fuese con aquellas señoras, lo que
ella hizo de muy buena gana. Y con parte de la estrecha cama del ventero, y
con la mitad de la que el oidor traía, se acomodaron aquella noche mejor de
lo que pensaban.

El cautivo, que, desde el punto que vio al oidor, le dio saltos el corazón
y barruntos de que aquél era su hermano, preguntó a uno de los criados que
con él venían que cómo se llamaba y si sabía de qué tierra era. El criado
le respondió que se llamaba el licenciado Juan Pérez de Viedma, y que había
oído decir que era de un lugar de las montañas de León. Con esta relación y
con lo que él había visto se acabó de confirmar de que aquél era su
hermano, que había seguido las letras por consejo de su padre; y,
alborotado y contento, llamando aparte a don Fernando, a Cardenio y al
cura, les contó lo que pasaba, certificándoles que aquel oidor era su
hermano. Habíale dicho también el criado como iba proveído por oidor a las
Indias, en la Audiencia de Méjico. Supo también como aquella doncella era
su hija, de cuyo parto había muerto su madre, y que él había quedado muy
rico con el dote que con la hija se le quedó en casa. Pidióles consejo qué
modo tendría para descubrirse, o para conocer primero si, después de
descubierto, su hermano, por verle pobre, se afrentaba o le recebía con
buenas entrañas.

-Déjeseme a mí el hacer esa experiencia -dijo el cura-; cuanto más, que no
hay pensar sino que vos, señor capitán, seréis muy bien recebido; porque el
valor y prudencia que en su buen parecer descubre vuestro hermano no da
indicios de ser arrogante ni desconocido, ni que no ha de saber poner los
casos de la fortuna en su punto.

-Con todo eso -dijo el capitán- yo querría, no de improviso, sino por
rodeos, dármele a conocer.

-Ya os digo -respondió el cura- que yo lo trazaré de modo que todos
quedemos satisfechos.

Ya, en esto, estaba aderezada la cena, y todos se sentaron a la mesa, eceto
el cautivo y las señoras, que cenaron de por sí en su aposento. En la mitad
de la cena dijo el cura:

-Del mesmo nombre de vuestra merced, señor oidor, tuve yo una camarada en
Costantinopla, donde estuve cautivo algunos años; la cual camarada era uno
de los valientes soldados y capitanes que había en toda la infantería
española, pero tanto cuanto tenía de esforzado y valeroso lo tenía de
desdichado.

-Y ¿cómo se llamaba ese capitán, señor mío? -preguntó el oidor.

-Llamábase -respondió el cura- Ruy Pérez de Viedma, y era natural de un
lugar de las montañas de León, el cual me contó un caso que a su padre
con sus hermanos le había sucedido, que, a no contármelo un hombre tan
verdadero como él, lo tuviera por conseja de aquellas que las viejas
cuentan el invierno al fuego. Porque me dijo que su padre había dividido su
hacienda entre tres hijos que tenía, y les había dado ciertos consejos,
mejores que los de Catón. Y sé yo decir que el que él escogió de venir a la
guerra le había sucedido tan bien que en pocos años, por su valor y
esfuerzo, sin otro brazo que el de su mucha virtud, subió a ser capitán de
infantería, y a verse en camino y predicamento de ser presto maestre de
campo. Pero fuele la fortuna contraria, pues donde la pudiera esperar y
tener buena, allí la perdió, con perder la libertad en la felicísima
jornada donde tantos la cobraron, que fue en la batalla de Lepanto. Yo la
perdí en la Goleta, y después, por diferentes sucesos, nos hallamos
camaradas en Costantinopla. Desde allí vino a Argel, donde sé que le
sucedió uno de los más estraños casos que en el mundo han sucedido.

De aquí fue prosiguiendo el cura, y, con brevedad sucinta, contó lo que con
Zoraida a su hermano había sucedido; a todo lo cual estaba tan atento el
oidor, que ninguna vez había sido tan oidor como entonces. Sólo llegó el
cura al punto de cuando los franceses despojaron a los cristianos que en la
barca venían, y la pobreza y necesidad en que su camarada y la hermosa mora
habían quedado; de los cuales no había sabido en qué habían parado, ni si
habían llegado a España, o llevádolos los franceses a Francia.

Todo lo que el cura decía estaba escuchando, algo de allí desviado, el
capitán, y notaba todos los movimientos que su hermano hacía; el cual,
viendo que ya el cura había llegado al fin de su cuento, dando un grande
suspiro y llenándosele los ojos de agua, dijo:

-¡Oh, señor, si supiésedes las nuevas que me habéis contado, y cómo me
tocan tan en parte que me es forzoso dar muestras dello con estas lágrimas
que, contra toda mi discreción y recato, me salen por los ojos! Ese capitán
tan valeroso que decís es mi mayor hermano, el cual, como más fuerte y de
más altos pensamientos que yo ni otro hermano menor mío, escogió el honroso
y digno ejercicio de la guerra, que fue uno de los tres caminos que nuestro
padre nos propuso, según os dijo vuestra camarada en la conseja que, a
vuestro parecer, le oístes. Yo seguí el de las letras, en las cuales Dios y
mi diligencia me han puesto en el grado que me veis. Mi menor hermano está
en el Pirú, tan rico que con lo que ha enviado a mi padre y a mí ha
satisfecho bien la parte que él se llevó, y aun dado a las manos de mi
padre con que poder hartar su liberalidad natural; y yo, ansimesmo, he
podido con más decencia y autoridad tratarme en mis estudios y llegar al
puesto en que me veo. Vive aún mi padre, muriendo con el deseo de saber de
su hijo mayor, y pide a Dios con continuas oraciones no cierre la muerte
sus ojos hasta que él vea con vida a los de su hijo; del cual me maravillo,
siendo tan discreto, cómo en tantos trabajos y afliciones, o prósperos
sucesos, se haya descuidado de dar noticia de sí a su padre; que si él lo
supiera, o alguno de nosotros, no tuviera necesidad de aguardar al milagro
de la caña para alcanzar su rescate. Pero de lo que yo agora me temo es de
pensar si aquellos franceses le habrán dado libertad, o le habrán muerto
por encubrir su hurto. Esto todo será que yo prosiga mi viaje, no con aquel
contento con que le comencé, sino con toda melancolía y tristeza. ¡Oh buen
hermano mío, y quién supiera agora dónde estabas; que yo te fuera a buscar
y a librar de tus trabajos, aunque fuera a costa de los míos! ¡Oh, quién
llevara nuevas a nuestro viejo padre de que tenías vida, aunque estuvieras
en las mazmorras más escondidas de Berbería; que de allí te sacaran sus
riquezas, las de mi hermano y las mías! ¡Oh Zoraida hermosa y liberal,
quién pudiera pagar el bien que a un hermano hiciste!; ¡quién pudiera
hallarse al renacer de tu alma, y a las bodas, que tanto gusto a todos nos
dieran!

Estas y otras semejantes palabras decía el oidor, lleno de tanta compasión
con las nuevas que de su hermano le habían dado, que todos los que le oían
le acompañaban en dar muestras del sentimiento que tenían de su lástima.

Viendo, pues, el cura que tan bien había salido con su intención y con lo
que deseaba el capitán, no quiso tenerlos a todos más tiempo tristes, y
así, se levantó de la mesa, y, entrando donde estaba Zoraida, la tomó por
la mano, y tras ella se vinieron Luscinda, Dorotea y la hija del oidor.
Estaba esperando el capitán a ver lo que el cura quería hacer, que fue que,
tomándole a él asimesmo de la otra mano, con entrambos a dos se fue donde
el oidor y los demás caballeros estaban, y dijo:

-Cesen, señor oidor, vuestras lágrimas, y cólmese vuestro deseo de todo el
bien que acertare a desearse, pues tenéis delante a vuestro buen hermano y
a vuestra buena cuñada. Éste que aquí veis es el capitán Viedma, y ésta, la
hermosa mora que tanto bien le hizo. Los franceses que os dije los pusieron
en la estrecheza que veis, para que vos mostréis la liberalidad de vuestro
buen pecho.

Acudió el capitán a abrazar a su hermano, y él le puso ambas manos en los
pechos por mirarle algo más apartado; mas, cuando le acabó de conocer, le
abrazó tan estrechamente, derramando tan tiernas lágrimas de contento,que
los más de los que presentes estaban le hubieron de acompañar en ellas. Las
palabras que entrambos hermanos se dijeron, los sentimientos que mostraron,
apenas creo que pueden pensarse, cuanto más escribirse. Allí, en breves
razones, se dieron cuenta de sus sucesos; allí mostraron puesta en su punto
la buena amistad de dos hermanos; allí abrazó el oidor a Zoraida; allí la
ofreció su hacienda; allí hizo que la abrazase su hija; allí la cristiana
hermosa y la mora hermosísima renovaron las lágrimas de todos.

Allí don Quijote estaba atento, sin hablar palabra, considerando estos tan
estraños sucesos, atribuyéndolos todos a quimeras de la andante caballería.
Allí concertaron que el capitán y Zoraida se volviesen con su hermano a
Sevilla y avisasen a su padre de su hallazgo y libertad, para que, como
pudiese, viniese a hallarse en las bodas y bautismo de Zoraida, por no le
ser al oidor posible dejar el camino que llevaba, a causa de tener nuevas
que de allí a un mes partía la flota de Sevilla a la Nueva España, y
fuérale de grande incomodidad perder el viaje.

En resolución, todos quedaron contentos y alegres del buen suceso del
cautivo; y, como ya la noche iba casi en las dos partes de su jornada,
acordaron de recogerse y reposar lo que de ella les quedaba. Don Quijote se
ofreció a hacer la guardia del castillo, porque de algún gigante o otro mal
andante follón no fuesen acometidos, codiciosos del gran tesoro de
hermosura que en aquel castillo se encerraba. Agradeciéronselo los que le
conocían, y dieron al oidor cuenta del humor estraño de don Quijote, de que
no poco gusto recibió.

Sólo Sancho Panza se desesperaba con la tardanza del recogimiento, y sólo
él se acomodó mejor que todos, echándose sobre los aparejos de su jumento,
que le costaron tan caros como adelante se dirá.

Recogidas, pues, las damas en su estancia, y los demás acomodádose como
menos mal pudieron, don Quijote se salió fuera de la venta a hacer la
centinela del castillo, como lo había prometido.

Sucedió, pues, que faltando poco por venir el alba, llegó a los oídos de
las damas una voz tan entonada y tan buena, que les obligó a que todas le
prestasen atento oído, especialmente Dorotea, que despierta estaba, a cuyo
lado dormía doña Clara de Viedma, que ansí se llamaba la hija del oidor.
Nadie podía imaginar quién era la persona que tan bien cantaba, y era una
voz sola, sin que la acompañase instrumento alguno. Unas veces les parecía
que cantaban en el patio; otras, que en la caballeriza; y, estando en esta
confusión muy atentas, llegó a la puerta del aposento Cardenio y dijo:

-Quien no duerme, escuche; que oirán una voz de un mozo de mulas, que de
tal manera canta que encanta.

-Ya lo oímos, señor -respondió Dorotea.

Y, con esto, se fue Cardenio; y Dorotea, poniendo toda la atención posible,
entendió que lo que se cantaba era esto:





Capítulo XLIII. Donde se cuenta la agradable historia del mozo de mulas,
con otros estraños acaecimientos en la venta sucedidos]


   -Marinero soy de amor,
   y en su piélago profundo
   navego sin esperanza
   de llegar a puerto alguno.
   Siguiendo voy a una estrella
   que desde lejos descubro,
   más bella y resplandeciente
   que cuantas vio Palinuro.
   Yo no sé adónde me guía,
   y así, navego confuso,
   el alma a mirarla atenta,
   cuidadosa y con descuido.
   Recatos impertinentes,
   honestidad contra el uso,
   son nubes que me la encubren
   cuando más verla procuro.
   ¡Oh clara y luciente estrella,
   en cuya lumbre me apuro!;
   al punto que te me encubras,
   será de mi muerte el punto.

Llegando el que cantaba a este punto, le pareció a Dorotea que no sería
bien que dejase Clara de oír una tan buena voz; y así, moviéndola a una y a
otra parte, la despertó diciéndole:

-Perdóname, niña, que te despierto, pues lo hago porque gustes de oír la
mejor voz que quizá habrás oído en toda tu vida.

Clara despertó toda soñolienta, y de la primera vez no entendió lo que
Dorotea le decía; y, volviéndoselo a preguntar, ella se lo volvió a decir,
por lo cual estuvo atenta Clara. Pero, apenas hubo oído dos versos que el
que cantaba iba prosiguiendo, cuando le tomó un temblor tan estraño como si
de algún grave accidente de cuartana estuviera enferma, y, abrazándose
estrechamente con Teodora, le dijo:

-¡Ay señora de mi alma y de mi vida!, ¿para qué me despertastes?; que el
mayor bien que la fortuna me podía hacer por ahora era tenerme cerrados los
ojos y los oídos, para no ver ni oír a ese desdichado músico.

-¿Qué es lo que dices, niña?; mira que dicen que el que canta es un mozo de
mulas.

-No es sino señor de lugares -respondió Clara-, y el que le tiene en mi
alma con tanta seguridad que si él no quiere dejalle, no le será quitado
eternamente.

Admirada quedó Dorotea de las sentidas razones de la muchacha, pareciéndole
que se aventajaban en mucho a la discreción que sus pocos años prometían; y
así, le dijo:

-Habláis de modo, señora Clara, que no puedo entenderos: declaraos más y
decidme qué es lo que decís de alma y de lugares, y deste músico, cuya voz
tan inquieta os tiene. Pero no me digáis nada por ahora, que no quiero
perder, por acudir a vuestro sobresalto, el gusto que recibo de oír al que
canta; que me parece que con nuevos versos y nuevo tono torna a su canto.

-Sea en buen hora -respondió Clara.

Y, por no oílle, se tapó con las manos entrambos oídos, de lo que también
se admiró Dorotea; la cual, estando atenta a lo que se cantaba, vio que
proseguían en esta manera:

   -Dulce esperanza mía,
   que, rompiendo imposibles y malezas,
   sigues firme la vía
   que tú mesma te finges y aderezas:
   no te desmaye el verte
   a cada paso junto al de tu muerte.
   No alcanzan perezosos
   honrados triunfos ni vitoria alguna,
   ni pueden ser dichosos
   los que, no contrastando a la fortuna,
   entregan, desvalidos,
   al ocio blando todos los sentidos.
   Que amor sus glorias venda
   caras, es gran razón, y es trato justo,
   pues no hay más rica prenda
   que la que se quilata por su gusto;
   y es cosa manifiesta
   que no es de estima lo que poco cuesta.
   Amorosas porfías
   tal vez alcanzan imposibles cosas;
   y ansí, aunque con las mías
   sigo de amor las más dificultosas,
   no por eso recelo
   de no alcanzar desde la tierra el cielo.

Aquí dio fin la voz, y principio a nuevos sollozos Clara. Todo lo cual
encendía el deseo de Dorotea, que deseaba saber la causa de tan suave canto
y de tan triste lloro. Y así, le volvió a preguntar qué era lo que le
quería decir denantes. Entonces Clara, temerosa de que Luscinda no la
oyese, abrazando estrechamente a Dorotea, puso su boca tan junto del oído
de Dorotea, que seguramente podía hablar sin ser de otro sentida, y así le
dijo:

-Este que canta, señora mía, es un hijo de un caballero natural del reino
de Aragón, señor de dos lugares, el cual vivía frontero de la casa de mi
padre en la Corte; y, aunque mi padre tenía las ventanas de su casa con
lienzos en el invierno y celosías en el verano, yo no sé lo que fue, ni lo
que no, que este caballero, que andaba al estudio, me vio, ni sé si en la
iglesia o en otra parte. Finalmente, él se enamoró de mí, y me lo dio a
entender desde las ventanas de su casa con tantas señas y con tantas
lágrimas, que yo le hube de creer, y aun querer, sin saber lo que me
quería. Entre las señas que me hacía, era una de juntarse la una mano con
la otra, dándome a entender que se casaría conmigo; y, aunque yo me
holgaría mucho de que ansí fuera, como sola y sin madre, no sabía con quién
comunicallo, y así, lo dejé estar sin dalle otro favor si no era, cuando
estaba mi padre fuera de casa y el suyo también, alzar un poco el lienzo o
la celosía y dejarme ver toda, de lo que él hacía tanta fiesta, que daba
señales de volverse loco. Llegóse en esto el tiempo de la partida de mi
padre, la cual él supo, y no de mí, pues nunca pude decírselo. Cayó malo, a
lo que yo entiendo, de pesadumbre; y así, el día que nos partimos nunca
pude verle para despedirme dél, siquiera con los ojos. Pero, a cabo de dos
días que caminábamos, al entrar de una posada, en un lugar una jornada de
aquí, le vi a la puerta del mesón, puesto en hábito de mozo de mulas, tan
al natural que si yo no le trujera tan retratado en mi alma fuera imposible
conocelle. Conocíle, admiréme y alegréme; él me miró a hurto de mi padre,
de quien él siempre se esconde cuando atraviesa por delante de mí en los
caminos y en las posadas do llegamos; y, como yo sé quién es, y considero
que por amor de mí viene a pie y con tanto trabajo, muérome de pesadumbre,
y adonde él pone los pies pongo yo los ojos. No sé con qué intención viene,
ni cómo ha podido escaparse de su padre, que le quiere estraordinariamente,
porque no tiene otro heredero, y porque él lo merece, como lo verá vuestra
merced cuando le vea. Y más le sé decir: que todo aquello que canta lo saca
de su cabeza; que he oído decir que es muy gran estudiante y poeta. Y hay
más: que cada vez que le veo o le oigo cantar, tiemblo toda y me
sobresalto, temerosa de que mi padre le conozca y venga en conocimiento de
nuestros deseos. En mi vida le he hablado palabra, y, con todo eso, le
quiero de manera que no he de poder vivir sin él. Esto es, señora mía, todo
lo que os puedo decir deste músico, cuya voz tanto os ha contentado; que en
sola ella echaréis bien de ver que no es mozo de mulas, como decís, sino
señor de almas y lugares, como yo os he dicho.

-No digáis más, señora doña Clara -dijo a esta sazón Dorotea, y esto,
besándola mil veces-; no digáis más, digo, y esperad que venga el nuevo
día, que yo espero en Dios de encaminar de manera vuestros negocios, que
tengan el felice fin que tan honestos principios merecen.

-¡Ay señora! -dijo doña Clara-, ¿qué fin se puede esperar, si su padre es
tan principal y tan rico que le parecerá que aun yo no puedo ser criada de
su hijo, cuanto más esposa? Pues casarme yo a hurto de mi padre, no lo haré
por cuanto hay en el mundo. No querría sino que este mozo se volviese y me
dejase; quizá con no velle y con la gran distancia del camino que llevamos
se me aliviaría la pena que ahora llevo, aunque sé decir que este remedio
que me imagino me ha de aprovechar bien poco. No sé qué diablos ha sido
esto, ni por dónde se ha entrado este amor que le tengo, siendo yo tan
muchacha y él tan muchacho, que en verdad que creo que somos de una edad
mesma, y que yo no tengo cumplidos diez y seis años; que para el día de San
Miguel que vendrá dice mi padre que los cumplo.

No pudo dejar de reírse Dorotea, oyendo cuán como niña hablaba doña Clara,
a quien dijo:

-Reposemos, señora, lo poco que creo queda de la noche, y amanecerá Dios y
medraremos, o mal me andarán las manos.

Sosegáronse con esto, y en toda la venta se guardaba un grande silencio;
solamente no dormían la hija de la ventera y Maritornes, su criada, las
cuales, como ya sabían el humor de que pecaba don Quijote, y que estaba
fuera de la venta armado y a caballo haciendo la guarda, determinaron las
dos de hacelle alguna burla, o, a lo menos, de pasar un poco el tiempo
oyéndole sus disparates.

Es, pues, el caso que en toda la venta no había ventana que saliese al
campo, sino un agujero de un pajar, por donde echaban la paja por defuera.
A este agujero se pusieron las dos semidoncellas, y vieron que don Quijote
estaba a caballo, recostado sobre su lanzón, dando de cuando en cuando tan
dolientes y profundos suspiros que parecía, que con cada uno se le
arrancaba el alma. Y asimesmo oyeron que decía con voz blanda, regalada y
amorosa:

-¡Oh mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso, estremo de toda hermosura, fin y remate
de la discreción, archivo del mejor donaire, depósito de la honestidad, y,
ultimadamente, idea de todo lo provechoso, honesto y deleitable que hay en
el mundo! Y ¿qué fará agora la tu merced? ¿Si tendrás por ventura las
mientes en tu cautivo caballero, que a tantos peligros, por sólo servirte,
de su voluntad ha querido ponerse? Dame tú nuevas della, ¡oh luminaria de
las tres caras! Quizá con envidia de la suya la estás ahora mirando; que, o
paseándose por alguna galería de sus suntuosos palacios, o ya puesta de
pechos sobre algún balcón, está considerando cómo, salva su honestidad y
grandeza, ha de amansar la tormenta que por ella este mi cuitado corazón
padece, qué gloria ha de dar a mis penas, qué sosiego a mi cuidado y,
finalmente, qué vida a mi muerte y qué premio a mis servicios. Y tú, sol,
que ya debes de estar apriesa ensillando tus caballos, por madrugar y salir
a ver a mi señora, así como la veas, suplícote que de mi parte la saludes;
pero guárdate que al verla y saludarla no le des paz en el rostro, que
tendré más celos de ti que tú los tuviste de aquella ligera ingrata que
tanto te hizo sudar y correr por los llanos de Tesalia, o por las riberas
de Peneo, que no me acuerdo bien por dónde corriste entonces celoso y
enamorado.

A este punto llegaba entonces don Quijote en su tan lastimero
razonamiento, cuando la hija de la ventera le comenzó a cecear y a
decirle:

-Señor mío, lléguese acá la vuestra merced si es servido.

A cuyas señas y voz volvió don Quijote la cabeza, y vio, a la luz de la
luna, que entonces estaba en toda su claridad, cómo le llamaban del agujero
que a él le pareció ventana, y aun con rejas doradas, como conviene que las
tengan tan ricos castillos como él se imaginaba que era aquella venta; y
luego en el instante se le representó en su loca imaginación que otra vez,
como la pasada, la doncella fermosa, hija de la señora de aquel castillo,
vencida de su amor, tornaba a solicitarle; y con este pensamiento, por no
mostrarse descortés y desagradecido, volvió las riendas a Rocinante y se
llegó al agujero, y, así como vio a las dos mozas, dijo:

-Lástima os tengo, fermosa señora, de que hayades puesto vuestras amorosas
mientes en parte donde no es posible corresponderos conforme merece vuestro
gran valor y gentileza; de lo que no debéis dar culpa a este miserable
andante caballero, a quien tiene amor imposibilitado de poder entregar su
voluntad a otra que aquella que, en el punto que sus ojos la vieron, la
hizo señora absoluta de su alma. Perdonadme, buena señora, y recogeos en
vuestro aposento, y no queráis, con significarme más vuestros deseos, que
yo me muestre más desagradecido; y si del amor que me tenéis halláis en mí
otra cosa con que satisfaceros, que el mismo amor no sea, pedídmela; que yo
os juro, por aquella ausente enemiga dulce mía, de dárosla en continente,
si bien me pidiésedes una guedeja de los cabellos de Medusa, que eran todos
culebras, o ya los mesmos rayos del sol encerrados en una redoma.

-No ha menester nada deso mi señora, señor caballero -dijo a este punto
Maritornes.

-Pues, ¿qué ha menester, discreta dueña, vuestra señora? -respondió don
Quijote.

-Sola una de vuestras hermosas manos -dijo Maritornes-, por poder deshogar
con ella el gran deseo que a este agujero la ha traído, tan a peligro de su
honor que si su señor padre la hubiera sentido, la menor tajada della fuera
la oreja.

-¡Ya quisiera yo ver eso! -respondió don Quijote-; pero él se guardará bien
deso, si ya no quiere hacer el más desastrado fin que padre hizo en el
mundo, por haber puesto las manos en los delicados miembros de su enamorada
hija.

Parecióle a Maritornes que sin duda don Quijote daría la mano que le habían
pedido, y, proponiendo en su pensamiento lo que había de hacer, se bajó del
agujero y se fue a la caballeriza, donde tomó el cabestro del jumento de
Sancho Panza, y con mucha presteza se volvió a su agujero, a tiempo que don
Quijote se había puesto de pies sobre la silla de Rocinante, por alcanzar a
la ventana enrejada, donde se imaginaba estar la ferida doncella; y, al
darle la mano, dijo:

-Tomad, señora, esa mano, o, por mejor decir, ese verdugo de los
malhechores del mundo; tomad esa mano, digo, a quien no ha tocado otra de
mujer alguna, ni aun la de aquella que tiene entera posesión de todo mi
cuerpo. No os la doy para que la beséis, sino para que miréis la contestura
de sus nervios, la trabazón de sus músculos, la anchura y espaciosidad de
sus venas; de donde sacaréis qué tal debe de ser la fuerza del brazo que
tal mano tiene.

-Ahora lo veremos -dijo Maritornes.

Y, haciendo una lazada corrediza al cabestro, se la echó a la muñeca, y,
bajándose del agujero, ató lo que quedaba al cerrojo de la puerta del pajar
muy fuertemente. Don Quijote, que sintió la aspereza del cordel en su
muñeca, dijo:

-Más parece que vuestra merced me ralla que no que me regala la mano; no la
tratéis tan mal, pues ella no tiene la culpa del mal que mi voluntad os
hace, ni es bien que en tan poca parte venguéis el todo de vuestro enojo.
Mirad que quien quiere bien no se venga tan mal.

Pero todas estas razones de don Quijote ya no las escuchaba nadie, porque,
así como Maritornes le ató, ella y la otra se fueron, muertas de risa, y le
dejaron asido de manera que fue imposible soltarse.

Estaba, pues, como se ha dicho, de pies sobre Rocinante, metido todo el
brazo por el agujero y atado de la muñeca, y al cerrojo de la puerta, con
grandísimo temor y cuidado, que si Rocinante se desviaba a un cabo o a
otro, había de quedar colgado del brazo; y así, no osaba hacer movimiento
alguno, puesto que de la paciencia y quietud de Rocinante bien se podía
esperar que estaría sin moverse un siglo entero.

En resolución, viéndose don Quijote atado, y que ya las damas se habían
ido, se dio a imaginar que todo aquello se hacía por vía de encantamento,
como la vez pasada, cuando en aquel mesmo castillo le molió aquel moro
encantado del arriero; y maldecía entre sí su poca discreción y discurso,
pues, habiendo salido tan mal la vez primera de aquel castillo, se había
aventurado a entrar en él la segunda, siendo advertimiento de caballeros
andantes que, cuando han probado una aventura y no salido bien con ella, es
señal que no está para ellos guardada, sino para otros; y así, no tienen
necesidad de probarla segunda vez. Con todo esto, tiraba de su brazo, por
ver si podía soltarse; mas él estaba tan bien asido, que todas sus pruebas
fueron en vano. Bien es verdad que tiraba con tiento, porque Rocinante no
se moviese; y, aunque él quisiera sentarse y ponerse en la silla, no podía
sino estar en pie, o arrancarse la mano.

Allí fue el desear de la espada de Amadís, contra quien no tenía fuerza de
encantamento alguno; allí fue el maldecir de su fortuna; allí fue el
exagerar la falta que haría en el mundo su presencia el tiempo que allí
estuviese encantado, que sin duda alguna se había creído que lo estaba;
allí el acordarse de nuevo de su querida Dulcinea del Toboso; allí fue el
llamar a su buen escudero Sancho Panza, que, sepultado en sueño y tendido
sobre el albarda de su jumento, no se acordaba en aquel instante de la
madre que lo había parido; allí llamó a los sabios Lirgandeo y Alquife, que
le ayudasen; allí invocó a su buena amiga Urganda, que le socorriese, y,
finalmente, allí le tomó la mañana, tan desesperado y confuso que bramaba
como un toro; porque no esperaba él que con el día se remediara su cuita,
porque la tenía por eterna, teniéndose por encantado. Y hacíale creer esto
ver que Rocinante poco ni mucho se movía, y creía que de aquella suerte,
sin comer ni beber ni dormir, habían de estar él y su caballo, hasta que
aquel mal influjo de las estrellas se pasase, o hasta que otro más sabio
encantador le desencantase.

Pero engañóse mucho en su creencia, porque, apenas comenzó a amanecer,
cuando llegaron a la venta cuatro hombres de a caballo, muy bien puestos y
aderezados, con sus escopetas sobre los arzones. Llamaron a la puerta de la
venta, que aún estaba cerrada, con grandes golpes; lo cual, visto por don
Quijote desde donde aún no dejaba de hacer la centinela, con voz arrogante
y alta dijo:

-Caballeros, o escuderos, o quienquiera que seáis: no tenéis para qué
llamar a las puertas deste castillo; que asaz de claro está que a tales
horas, o los que están dentro duermen, o no tienen por costumbre de abrirse
las fortalezas hasta que el sol esté tendido por todo el suelo. Desviaos
afuera, y esperad que aclare el día, y entonces veremos si será justo o no
que os abran.

-¿Qué diablos de fortaleza o castillo es éste -dijo uno-, para obligarnos a
guardar esas ceremonias? Si sois el ventero, mandad que nos abran, que
somos caminantes que no queremos más de dar cebada a nuestras cabalgaduras
y pasar adelante, porque vamos de priesa.

-¿Paréceos, caballeros, que tengo yo talle de ventero? -respondió don
Quijote.

-No sé de qué tenéis talle -respondió el otro-, pero sé que decís
disparates en llamar castillo a esta venta.

-Castillo es -replicó don Quijote-, y aun de los mejores de toda esta
provincia; y gente tiene dentro que ha tenido cetro en la mano y corona en
la cabeza.

-Mejor fuera al revés -dijo el caminante-: el cetro en la cabeza y la
corona en la mano. Y será, si a mano viene, que debe de estar dentro alguna
compañía de representantes, de los cuales es tener a menudo esas coronas y
cetros que decís, porque en una venta tan pequeña, y adonde se guarda tanto
silencio como ésta, no creo yo que se alojan personas dignas de corona y
cetro.

-Sabéis poco del mundo -replicó don Quijote-, pues ignoráis los casos que
suelen acontecer en la caballería andante.

Cansábanse los compañeros que con el preguntante venían del coloquio que
con don Quijote pasaba, y así, tornaron a llamar con grande furia; y fue de
modo que el ventero despertó, y aun todos cuantos en la venta estaban; y
así, se levantó a preguntar quién llamaba. Sucedió en este tiempo que una
de las cabalgaduras en que venían los cuatro que llamaban se llegó a oler a
Rocinante, que, melancólico y triste, con las orejas caídas, sostenía sin
moverse a su estirado señor; y como, en fin, era de carne, aunque parecía
de leño, no pudo dejar de resentirse y tornar a oler a quien le llegaba a
hacer caricias; y así, no se hubo movido tanto cuanto, cuando se desviaron
los juntos pies de don Quijote, y, resbalando de la silla, dieran con él en
el suelo, a no quedar colgado del brazo: cosa que le causó tanto dolor que
creyó o que la muñeca le cortaban, o que el brazo se le arrancaba; porque
él quedó tan cerca del suelo que con los estremos de las puntas de los pies
besaba la tierra, que era en su perjuicio, porque, como sentía lo poco que
le faltaba para poner las plantas en la tierra, fatigábase y estirábase
cuanto podía por alcanzar al suelo: bien así como los que están en el
tormento de la garrucha, puestos a toca, no toca, que ellos mesmos son
causa de acrecentar su dolor, con el ahínco que ponen en estirarse,
engañados de la esperanza que se les representa, que con poco más que se
estiren llegarán al suelo.





Capítulo XLIV. Donde se prosiguen los inauditos sucesos de la venta


En efeto, fueron tantas las voces que don Quijote dio, que, abriendo de
presto las puertas de la venta, salió el ventero, despavorido, a ver quién
tales gritos daba, y los que estaban fuera hicieron lo mesmo. Maritornes,
que ya había despertado a las mismas voces, imaginando lo que podía ser, se
fue al pajar y desató, sin que nadie lo viese, el cabestro que a don
Quijote sostenía, y él dio luego en el suelo, a vista del ventero y de los
caminantes, que, llegándose a él, le preguntaron qué tenía, que tales voces
daba. Él, sin responder palabra, se quitó el cordel de la muñeca, y,
levantándose en pie, subió sobre Rocinante, embrazó su adarga, enristró su
lanzón, y, tomando buena parte del campo, volvió a medio galope, diciendo:

-Cualquiera que dijere que yo he sido con justo título encantado, como mi
señora la princesa Micomicona me dé licencia para ello, yo le desmiento, le
rieto y desafío a singular batalla.

Admirados se quedaron los nuevos caminantes de las palabras de don Quijote,
pero el ventero les quitó de aquella admiración, diciéndoles que era don
Quijote, y que no había que hacer caso dél, porque estaba fuera de juicio.

Preguntáronle al ventero si acaso había llegado a aquella venta un muchacho
de hasta edad de quince años, que venía vestido como mozo de mulas, de
tales y tales señas, dando las mesmas que traía el amante de doña Clara. El
ventero respondió que había tanta gente en la venta, que no había echado de
ver en el que preguntaban. Pero, habiendo visto uno dellos el coche donde
había venido el oidor, dijo:

-Aquí debe de estar sin duda, porque éste es el coche que él dicen que
sigue; quédese uno de nosotros a la puerta y entren los demás a buscarle; y
aun sería bien que uno de nosotros rodease toda la venta, porque no se
fuese por las bardas de los corrales.

-Así se hará -respondió uno dellos.

Y, entrándose los dos dentro, uno se quedó a la puerta y el otro se fue a
rodear la venta; todo lo cual veía el ventero, y no sabía atinar para qué
se hacían aquellas diligencias, puesto que bien creyó que buscaban aquel
mozo cuyas señas le habían dado.

Ya a esta sazón aclaraba el día; y, así por esto como por el ruido que don
Quijote había hecho, estaban todos despiertos y se levantaban,
especialmente doña Clara y Dorotea, que la una con sobresalto de tener tan
cerca a su amante, y la otra con el deseo de verle, habían podido dormir
bien mal aquella noche. Don Quijote, que vio que ninguno de los cuatro
caminantes hacía caso dél, ni le respondían a su demanda, moría y rabiaba
de despecho y saña; y si él hallara en las ordenanzas de su caballería que
lícitamente podía el caballero andante tomar y emprender otra empresa,
habiendo dado su palabra y fe de no ponerse en ninguna hasta acabar la que
había prometido, él embistiera con todos, y les hiciera responder mal de su
grado. Pero, por parecerle no convenirle ni estarle bien comenzar nueva
empresa hasta poner a Micomicona en su reino, hubo de callar y estarse
quedo, esperando a ver en qué paraban las diligencias de aquellos
caminantes; uno de los cuales halló al mancebo que buscaba, durmiendo al
lado de un mozo de mulas, bien descuidado de que nadie ni le buscase, ni
menos de que le hallase. El hombre le trabó del brazo y le dijo:

-Por cierto, señor don Luis, que responde bien a quien vos sois el hábito
que tenéis, y que dice bien la cama en que os hallo al regalo con que
vuestra madre os crió.

Limpióse el mozo los soñolientos ojos y miró de espacio al que le tenía
asido, y luego conoció que era criado de su padre, de que recibió tal
sobresalto, que no acertó o no pudo hablarle palabra por un buen espacio. Y
el criado prosiguió diciendo:

-Aquí no hay que hacer otra cosa, señor don Luis, sino prestar paciencia y
dar la vuelta a casa, si ya vuestra merced no gusta que su padre y mi señor
la dé al otro mundo, porque no se puede esperar otra cosa de la pena con
que queda por vuestra ausencia.

-Pues, ¿cómo supo mi padre -dijo don Luis- que yo venía este camino y en
este traje?

-Un estudiante -respondió el criado- a quien distes cuenta de vuestros
pensamientos fue el que lo descubrió, movido a lástima de las que vio que
hacía vuestro padre al punto que os echó de menos; y así, despachó a cuatro
de sus criados en vuestra busca, y todos estamos aquí a vuestro servicio,
más contentos de lo que imaginar se puede, por el buen despacho con que
tornaremos, llevándoos a los ojos que tanto os quieren.

-Eso será como yo quisiere, o como el cielo lo ordenare -respondió don
Luis.

-¿Qué habéis de querer, o qué ha de ordenar el cielo, fuera de consentir en
volveros?; porque no ha de ser posible otra cosa.

Todas estas razones que entre los dos pasaban oyó el mozo de mulas junto a
quien don Luis estaba; y, levantándose de allí, fue a decir lo que pasaba a
don Fernando y a Cardenio, y a los demás, que ya vestido se habían; a los
cuales dijo cómo aquel hombre llamaba de don a aquel muchacho, y las
razones que pasaban, y cómo le quería volver a casa de su padre, y el mozo
no quería. Y con esto, y con lo que dél sabían de la buena voz que el cielo
le había dado, vinieron todos en gran deseo de saber más particularmente
quién era, y aun de ayudarle si alguna fuerza le quisiesen hacer; y así, se
fueron hacia la parte donde aún estaba hablando y porfiando con su criado.

Salía en esto Dorotea de su aposento, y tras ella doña Clara, toda turbada;
y, llamando Dorotea a Cardenio aparte, le contó en breves razones la
historia del músico y de doña Clara, a quien él también dijo lo que pasaba
de la venida a buscarle los criados de su padre, y no se lo dijo tan
callando que lo dejase de oír Clara; de lo que quedó tan fuera de sí que,
si Dorotea no llegara a tenerla, diera consigo en el suelo. Cardenio dijo a
Dorotea que se volviesen al aposento, que él procuraría poner remedio en
todo, y ellas lo hicieron.

Ya estaban todos los cuatro que venían a buscar a don Luis dentro de la
venta y rodeados dél, persuadiéndole que luego, sin detenerse un punto,
volviese a consolar a su padre. Él respondió que en ninguna manera lo podía
hacer hasta dar fin a un negocio en que le iba la vida, la honra y el alma.
Apretáronle entonces los criados, diciéndole que en ningún modo volverían
sin él, y que le llevarían, quisiese o no quisiese.

-Eso no haréis vosotros -replicó don Luis-, si no es llevándome muerto;
aunque, de cualquiera manera que me llevéis, será llevarme sin vida.

Ya a esta sazón habían acudido a la porfía todos los más que en la venta
estaban, especialmente Cardenio, don Fernando, sus camaradas, el oidor, el
cura, el barbero y don Quijote, que ya le pareció que no había necesidad de
guardar más el castillo. Cardenio, como ya sabía la historia del mozo,
preguntó a los que llevarle querían que qué les movía a querer llevar
contra su voluntad aquel muchacho.

-Muévenos -respondió uno de los cuatro- dar la vida a su padre, que por la
ausencia deste caballero queda a peligro de perderla.

A esto dijo don Luis:

-No hay para qué se dé cuenta aquí de mis cosas: yo soy libre, y volveré si
me diere gusto, y si no, ninguno de vosotros me ha de hacer fuerza.

-Harásela a vuestra merced la razón -respondió el hombre-; y, cuando ella

no bastare con vuestra merced, bastará con nosotros para hacer a lo que
venimos y lo que somos obligados.

-Sepamos qué es esto de raíz -dijo a este tiempo el oidor.

Pero el hombre, que lo conoció, como vecino de su casa, respondió:

-¿No conoce vuestra merced, señor oidor, a este caballero, que es el hijo
de su vecino, el cual se ha ausentado de casa de su padre en el hábito tan
indecente a su calidad como vuestra merced puede ver?

Miróle entonces el oidor más atentamente y conocióle; y, abrazándole, dijo:

-¿Qué niñerías son éstas, señor don Luis, o qué causas tan poderosas, que
os hayan movido a venir desta manera, y en este traje, que dice tan mal con
la calidad vuestra?

Al mozo se le vinieron las lágrimas a los ojos, y no pudo responder
palabra. El oidor dijo a los cuatro que se sosegasen, que todo se haría
bien; y, tomando por la mano a don Luis, le apartó a una parte y le
preguntó qué venida había sido aquélla.

Y, en tanto que le hacía esta y otras preguntas, oyeron grandes voces a la
puerta de la venta, y era la causa dellas que dos huéspedes que aquella
noche habían alojado en ella, viendo a toda la gente ocupada en saber lo
que los cuatro buscaban, habían intentado a irse sin pagar lo que debían;
mas el ventero, que atendía más a su negocio que a los ajenos, les asió al
salir de la puerta y pidió su paga, y les afeó su mala intención con tales
palabras, que les movió a que le respondiesen con los puños; y así, le
comenzaron a dar tal mano, que el pobre ventero tuvo necesidad de dar voces
y pedir socorro. La ventera y su hija no vieron a otro más desocupado para
poder socorrerle que a don Quijote, a quien la hija de la ventera dijo:

-Socorra vuestra merced, señor caballero, por la virtud que Dios le dio, a
mi pobre padre, que dos malos hombres le están moliendo como a cibera.

A lo cual respondió don Quijote, muy de espacio y con mucha flema:

-Fermosa doncella, no ha lugar por ahora vuestra petición, porque estoy
impedido de entremeterme en otra aventura en tanto que no diere cima a una
en que mi palabra me ha puesto. Mas lo que yo podré hacer por serviros es
lo que ahora diré: corred y decid a vuestro padre que se entretenga en esa
batalla lo mejor que pudiere, y que no se deje vencer en ningún modo, en
tanto que yo pido licencia a la princesa Micomicona para poder socorrerle
en su cuita; que si ella me la da, tened por cierto que yo le sacaré della.

-¡Pecadora de mí! -dijo a esto Maritornes, que estaba delante-: primero que
vuestra merced alcance esa licencia que dice, estará ya mi señor en el otro
mundo.

-Dadme vos, señora, que yo alcance la licencia que digo -respondió don
Quijote-; que, como yo la tenga, poco hará al caso que él esté en el otro
mundo; que de allí le sacaré a pesar del mismo mundo que lo contradiga; o,
por lo menos, os daré tal venganza de los que allá le hubieren enviado, que
quedéis más que medianamente satisfechas.

Y sin decir más se fue a poner de hinojos ante Dorotea, pidiéndole con
palabras caballerescas y andantescas que la su grandeza fuese servida de
darle licencia de acorrer y socorrer al castellano de aquel castillo, que
estaba puesto en una grave mengua. La princesa se la dio de buen talante, y
él luego, embrazando su adarga y poniendo mano a su espada, acudió a la
puerta de la venta, adonde aún todavía traían los dos huéspedes a mal traer
al ventero; pero, así como llegó, embazó y se estuvo quedo, aunque
Maritornes y la ventera le decían que en qué se detenía, que socorriese a
su señor y marido.

-Deténgome -dijo don Quijote- porque no me es lícito poner mano a la espada
contra gente escuderil; pero llamadme aquí a mi escudero Sancho, que a él
toca y atañe esta defensa y venganza.

Esto pasaba en la puerta de la venta, y en ella andaban las puñadas y
mojicones muy en su punto, todo en daño del ventero y en rabia de
Maritornes, la ventera y su hija, que se desesperaban de ver la cobardía de
don Quijote, y de lo mal que lo pasaba su marido, señor y padre.

Pero dejémosle aquí, que no faltará quien le socorra, o si no, sufra y
calle el que se atreve a más de a lo que sus fuerzas le prometen, y
volvámonos atrás cincuenta pasos, a ver qué fue lo que don Luis respondió
al oidor, que le dejamos aparte, preguntándole la causa de su venida a pie
y de tan vil traje vestido. A lo cual el mozo, asiéndole fuertemente de las
manos, como en señal de que algún gran dolor le apretaba el corazón, y
derramando lágrimas en grande abundancia, le dijo:

-Señor mío, yo no sé deciros otra cosa sino que desde el punto que quiso el
cielo y facilitó nuestra vecindad que yo viese a mi señora doña Clara, hija
vuestra y señora mía, desde aquel instante la hice dueño de mi voluntad; y
si la vuestra, verdadero señor y padre mío, no lo impide, en este mesmo día
ha de ser mi esposa. Por ella dejé la casa de mi padre, y por ella me puse
en este traje, para seguirla dondequiera que fuese, como la saeta al
blanco, o como el marinero al norte. Ella no sabe de mis deseos más de lo
que ha podido entender de algunas veces que desde lejos ha visto llorar mis
ojos. Ya, señor, sabéis la riqueza y la nobleza de mis padres, y como yo
soy su único heredero: si os parece que éstas son partes para que os
aventuréis a hacerme en todo venturoso, recebidme luego por vuestro hijo;
que si mi padre, llevado de otros disignios suyos, no gustare deste bien
que yo supe buscarme, más fuerza tiene el tiempo para deshacer y mudar las
cosas que las humanas voluntades.

Calló, en diciendo esto, el enamorado mancebo, y el oidor quedó en oírle
suspenso, confuso y admirado, así de haber oído el modo y la discreción con
que don Luis le había descubierto su pensamiento, como de verse en punto
que no sabía el que poder tomar en tan repentino y no esperado negocio; y
así, no respondió otra cosa sino que se sosegase por entonces, y
entretuviese a sus criados, que por aquel día no le volviesen, porque se
tuviese tiempo para considerar lo que mejor a todos estuviese. Besóle las
manos por fuerza don Luis, y aun se las bañó con lágrimas, cosa que pudiera
enternecer un corazón de mármol, no sólo el del oidor, que, como discreto,
ya había conocido cuán bien le estaba a su hija aquel matrimonio; puesto
que, si fuera posible, lo quisiera efetuar con voluntad del padre de don
Luis, del cual sabía que pretendía hacer de título a su hijo.

Ya a esta sazón estaban en paz los huéspedes con el ventero, pues, por
persuasión y buenas razones de don Quijote, más que por amenazas, le habían
pagado todo lo que él quiso, y los criados de don Luis aguardaban el fin de
la plática del oidor y la resolución de su amo, cuando el demonio, que no
duerme, ordenó que en aquel mesmo punto entró en la venta el barbero a
quien don Quijote quitó el yelmo de Mambrino y Sancho Panza los aparejos
del asno, que trocó con los del suyo; el cual barbero, llevando su jumento
a la caballeriza, vio a Sancho Panza que estaba aderezando no sé qué de la
albarda, y así como la vio la conoció, y se atrevió a arremeter a Sancho,
diciendo:

-¡Ah don ladrón, que aquí os tengo! ¡Venga mi bacía y mi albarda, con todos
mis aparejos que me robastes!

Sancho, que se vio acometer tan de improviso y oyó los vituperios que le
decían, con la una mano asió de la albarda, y con la otra dio un mojicón al
barbero que le bañó los dientes en sangre; pero no por esto dejó el barbero
la presa que tenía hecha en el albarda; antes, alzó la voz de tal manera
que todos los de la venta acudieron al ruido y pendencia, y decía:

-¡Aquí del rey y de la justicia, que, sobre cobrar mi hacienda, me quiere
matar este ladrón salteador de caminos!

-Mentís -respondió Sancho-, que yo no soy salteador de caminos; que en
buena guerra ganó mi señor don Quijote estos despojos.

Ya estaba don Quijote delante, con mucho contento de ver cuán bien se
defendía y ofendía su escudero, y túvole desde allí adelante por hombre de
pro, y propuso en su corazón de armalle caballero en la primera ocasión que
se le ofreciese, por parecerle que sería en él bien empleada la orden de la
caballería. Entre otras cosas que el barbero decía en el discurso de la
pendencia, vino a decir:

-Señores, así esta albarda es mía como la muerte que debo a Dios, y así la
conozco como si la hubiera parido; y ahí está mi asno en el establo, que no
me dejará mentir; si no, pruébensela, y si no le viniere pintiparada, yo
quedaré por infame. Y hay más: que el mismo día que ella se me quitó, me
quitaron también una bacía de azófar nueva, que no se había estrenado, que
era señora de un escudo.

Aquí no se pudo contener don Quijote sin responder: y, poniéndose entre los
dos y apartándoles, depositando la albarda en el suelo, que la tuviese de
manifiesto hasta que la verdad se aclarase, dijo:

-¡Porque vean vuestras mercedes clara y manifiestamente el error en que
está este buen escudero, pues llama bacía a lo que fue, es y será yelmo de
Mambrino, el cual se lo quité yo en buena guerra, y me hice señor dél con
ligítima y lícita posesión! En lo del albarda no me entremeto, que lo que
en ello sabré decir es que mi escudero Sancho me pidió licencia para quitar
los jaeces del caballo deste vencido cobarde, y con ellos adornar el suyo;
yo se la di, y él los tomó, y, de haberse convertido de jaez en albarda, no
sabré dar otra razón si no es la ordinaria: que como esas transformaciones
se ven en los sucesos de la caballería; para confirmación de lo cual,
corre, Sancho hijo, y saca aquí el yelmo que este buen hombre dice ser
bacía.

-¡Pardiez, señor -dijo Sancho-, si no tenemos otra prueba de nuestra
intención que la que vuestra merced dice, tan bacía es el yelmo de Malino
como el jaez deste buen hombre albarda!

-Haz lo que te mando -replicó don Quijote-, que no todas las cosas deste
castillo han de ser guiadas por encantamento.

Sancho fue a do estaba la bacía y la trujo; y, así como don Quijote la vio,
la tomó en las manos y dijo:

-Miren vuestras mercedes con qué cara podía decir este escudero que ésta es
bacía, y no el yelmo que yo he dicho; y juro por la orden de caballería que
profeso que este yelmo fue el mismo que yo le quité, sin haber añadido en
él ni quitado cosa alguna.

-En eso no hay duda -dijo a esta sazón Sancho-, porque desde que mi señor
le ganó hasta agora no ha hecho con él más de una batalla, cuando libró a
los sin ventura encadenados; y si no fuera por este baciyelmo, no lo pasara
entonces muy bien, porque hubo asaz de pedradas en aquel trance.





Capítulo XLV. Donde se acaba de averiguar la duda del yelmo de Mambrino y
de la albarda, y otras aventuras sucedidas, con toda verdad


-¿Qué les parece a vuestras mercedes, señores -dijo el barbero-, de lo que
afirman estos gentiles hombres, pues aún porfían que ésta no es bacía,
sino yelmo?

-Y quien lo contrario dijere -dijo don Quijote-, le haré yo conocer que
miente, si fuere caballero, y si escudero, que remiente mil veces.

Nuestro barbero, que a todo estaba presente, como tenía tan bien conocido
el humor de don Quijote, quiso esforzar su desatino y llevar adelante la
burla para que todos riesen, y dijo, hablando con el otro barbero:

-Señor barbero, o quien sois, sabed que yo también soy de vuestro oficio, y
tengo más ha de veinte años carta de examen, y conozco muy bien de todos
los instrumentos de la barbería, sin que le falte uno; y ni más ni menos
fui un tiempo en mi mocedad soldado, y sé también qué es yelmo, y qué es
morrión, y celada de encaje, y otras cosas tocantes a la milicia, digo, a
los géneros de armas de los soldados; y digo, salvo mejor parecer,
remitiéndome siempre al mejor entendimiento, que esta pieza que está aquí
delante y que este buen señor tiene en las manos, no sólo no es bacía de
barbero, pero está tan lejos de serlo como está lejos lo blanco de lo negro
y la verdad de la mentira; también digo que éste, aunque es yelmo, no es
yelmo entero.

-No, por cierto -dijo don Quijote-, porque le falta la mitad, que es la
babera.

-Así es -dijo el cura, que ya había entendido la intención de su amigo el
barbero.

Y lo mismo confirmó Cardenio, don Fernando y sus camaradas; y aun el oidor,
si no estuviera tan pensativo con el negocio de don Luis, ayudara, por su
parte, a la burla; pero las veras de lo que pensaba le tenían tan suspenso,
que poco o nada atendía a aquellos donaires.

-¡Válame Dios! -dijo a esta sazón el barbero burlado-; ¿que es posible que
tanta gente honrada diga que ésta no es bacía, sino yelmo? Cosa parece ésta
que puede poner en admiración a toda una Universidad, por discreta que sea.
Basta: si es que esta bacía es yelmo, también debe de ser esta albarda jaez
de caballo, como este señor ha dicho.

-A mí albarda me parece -dijo don Quijote-, pero ya he dicho que en eso no
me entremeto.

-De que sea albarda o jaez -dijo el cura- no está en más de decirlo el
señor don Quijote; que en estas cosas de la caballería todos estos señores
y yo le damos la ventaja.

-Por Dios, señores míos -dijo don Quijote-, que son tantas y tan estrañas
las cosas que en este castillo, en dos veces que en él he alojado, me han
sucedido, que no me atreva a decir afirmativamente ninguna cosa de lo que
acerca de lo que en él se contiene se preguntare, porque imagino que cuanto
en él se trata va por vía de encantamento. La primera vez me fatigó mucho
un moro encantado que en él hay, y a Sancho no le fue muy bien con otros
sus secuaces; y anoche estuve colgado deste brazo casi dos horas, sin saber
cómo ni cómo no vine a caer en aquella desgracia. Así que, ponerme yo agora
en cosa de tanta confusión a dar mi parecer, será caer en juicio temerario.
En lo que toca a lo que dicen que ésta es bacía, y no yelmo, ya yo tengo
respondido; pero, en lo de declarar si ésa es albarda o jaez, no me atrevo
a dar sentencia difinitiva: sólo lo dejo al buen parecer de vuestras
mercedes. Quizá por no ser armados caballeros, como yo lo soy, no tendrán
que ver con vuestras mercedes los encantamentos deste lugar, y tendrán los
entendimientos libres, y podrán juzgar de las cosas deste castillo como
ellas son real y verdaderamente, y no como a mí me parecían.

-No hay duda -respondió a esto don Fernando-, sino que el señor don Quijote
ha dicho muy bien hoy que a nosotros toca la difinición deste caso; y,
porque vaya con más fundamento, yo tomaré en secreto los votos destos
señores, y de lo que resultare daré entera y clara noticia.

Para aquellos que la tenían del humor de don Quijote, era todo esto materia
de grandísima risa; pero, para los que le ignoraban, les parecía el mayor
disparate del mundo, especialmente a los cuatro criados de don Luis, y a
don Luis ni más ni menos, y a otros tres pasajeros que acaso habían llegado
a la venta, que tenían parecer de ser cuadrilleros, como, en efeto, lo
eran. Pero el que más se desesperaba era el barbero, cuya bacía, allí
delante de sus ojos, se le había vuelto en yelmo de Mambrino, y cuya
albarda pensaba sin duda alguna que se le había de volver en jaez rico de
caballo; y los unos y los otros se reían de ver cómo andaba don Fernando
tomando los votos de unos en otros, hablándolos al oído para que en secreto
declarasen si era albarda o jaez aquella joya sobre quien tanto se había
peleado. Y, después que hubo tomado los votos de aquellos que a don Quijote
conocían, dijo en alta voz:

-El caso es, buen hombre, que ya yo estoy cansado de tomar tantos
pareceres, porque veo que a ninguno pregunto lo que deseo saber que no me
diga que es disparate el decir que ésta sea albarda de jumento, sino jaez
de caballo, y aun de caballo castizo; y así, habréis de tener paciencia,
porque, a vuestro pesar y al de vuestro asno, éste es jaez y no albarda, y
vos habéis alegado y probado muy mal de vuestra parte.

-No la tenga yo en el cielo -dijo el sobrebarbero- si todos vuestras
mercedes no se engañan, y que así parezca mi ánima ante Dios como ella me
parece a mí albarda, y no jaez; pero allá van leyes..., etcétera; y no digo
más; y en verdad que no estoy borracho: que no me he desayunado, si de
pecar no.

No menos causaban risa las necedades que decía el barbero que los
disparates de don Quijote, el cual a esta sazón dijo:

-Aquí no hay más que hacer, sino que cada uno tome lo que es suyo, y a
quien Dios se la dio, San Pedro se la bendiga.

Uno de los cuatro dijo:

-Si ya no es que esto sea burla pesada, no me puedo persuadir que hombres
de tan buen entendimiento como son, o parecen, todos los que aquí están, se
atrevan a decir y afirmar que ésta no es bacía, ni aquélla albarda; mas,
como veo que lo afirman y lo dicen, me doy a entender que no carece de
misterio el porfiar una cosa tan contraria de lo que nos muestra la misma
verdad y la misma experiencia; porque, ¡voto a tal! -y arrojóle redondo-,
que no me den a mí a entender cuantos hoy viven en el mundo al revés de que
ésta no sea bacía de barbero y ésta albarda de asno.

-Bien podría ser de borrica -dijo el cura.

-Tanto monta -dijo el criado-, que el caso no consiste en eso, sino en si
es o no es albarda, como vuestras mercedes dicen.

Oyendo esto uno de los cuadrilleros que habían entrado, que había oído la
pendencia y quistión, lleno de cólera y de enfado, dijo:

-Tan albarda es como mi padre; y el que otra cosa ha dicho o dijere debe de
estar hecho uva.

-Mentís como bellaco villano -respondió don Quijote.

Y, alzando el lanzón, que nunca le dejaba de las manos, le iba a descargar
tal golpe sobre la cabeza, que, a no desviarse el cuadrillero, se le dejara
allí tendido. El lanzón se hizo pedazos en el suelo, y los demás
cuadrilleros, que vieron tratar mal a su compañero, alzaron la voz pidiendo
favor a la Santa Hermandad.

El ventero, que era de la cuadrilla, entró al punto por su varilla y por su
espada, y se puso al lado de sus compañeros; los criados de don Luis
rodearon a don Luis, porque con el alboroto no se les fuese; el barbero,
viendo la casa revuelta, tornó a asir de su albarda, y lo mismo hizo
Sancho; don Quijote puso mano a su espada y arremetió a los cuadrilleros.
Don Luis daba voces a sus criados que le dejasen a él y acorriesen a don
Quijote, y a Cardenio, y a don Fernando, que todos favorecían a don
Quijote. El cura daba voces, la ventera gritaba, su hija se afligía,
Maritornes lloraba, Dorotea estaba confusa, Luscinda suspensa y doña Clara
desmayada. El barbero aporreaba a Sancho, Sancho molía al barbero; don
Luis, a quien un criado suyo se atrevió a asirle del brazo porque no se
fuese, le dio una puñada que le bañó los dientes en sangre; el oidor le
defendía, don Fernando tenía debajo de sus pies a un cuadrillero,
midiéndole el cuerpo con ellos muy a su sabor. El ventero tornó a reforzar
la voz, pidiendo favor a la Santa Hermandad: de modo que toda la venta era
llantos, voces, gritos, confusiones, temores, sobresaltos, desgracias,
cuchilladas, mojicones, palos, coces y efusión de sangre. Y, en la mitad
deste caos, máquina y laberinto de cosas, se le representó en la memoria de
don Quijote que se veía metido de hoz y de coz en la discordia del campo de
Agramante; y así dijo, con voz que atronaba la venta:

-¡Ténganse todos; todos envainen; todos se sosieguen; óiganme todos, si
todos quieren quedar con vida!

A cuya gran voz, todos se pararon, y él prosiguió diciendo:

-¿No os dije yo, señores, que este castillo era encantado, y que alguna
región de demonios debe de habitar en él? En confirmación de lo cual,
quiero que veáis por vuestros ojos cómo se ha pasado aquí y trasladado
entre nosotros la discordia del campo de Agramante. Mirad cómo allí se
pelea por la espada, aquí por el caballo, acullá por el águila, acá por el
yelmo, y todos peleamos, y todos no nos entendemos. Venga, pues, vuestra
merced, señor oidor, y vuestra merced, señor cura, y el uno sirva de rey
Agramante, y el otro de rey Sobrino, y pónganos en paz; porque por Dios
Todopoderoso que es gran bellaquería que tanta gente principal como aquí
estamos se mate por causas tan livianas.

Los cuadrilleros, que no entendían el frasis de don Quijote, y se veían
malparados de don Fernando, Cardenio y sus camaradas, no querían sosegarse;
el barbero sí, porque en la pendencia tenía deshechas las barbas y el
albarda; Sancho, a la más mínima voz de su amo, obedeció como buen criado;
los cuatro criados de don Luis también se estuvieron quedos, viendo cuán
poco les iba en no estarlo. Sólo el ventero porfiaba que se habían de
castigar las insolencias de aquel loco, que a cada paso le alborotaba la
venta. Finalmente, el rumor se apaciguó por entonces, la albarda se quedó
por jaez hasta el día del juicio, y la bacía por yelmo y la venta por
castillo en la imaginación de don Quijote.

Puestos, pues, ya en sosiego, y hechos amigos todos a persuasión del oidor
y del cura, volvieron los criados de don Luis a porfiarle que al momento se
viniese con ellos; y, en tanto que él con ellos se avenía, el oidor
comunicó con don Fernando, Cardenio y el cura qué debía hacer en aquel
caso, contándoseles con las razones que don Luis le había dicho. En fin,
fue acordado que don Fernando dijese a los criados de don Luis quién él era
y cómo era su gusto que don Luis se fuese con él al Andalucía, donde de su
hermano el marqués sería estimado como el valor de don Luis merecía; porque
desta manera se sabía de la intención de don Luis que no volvería por
aquella vez a los ojos de su padre, si le hiciesen pedazos. Entendida,
pues, de los cuatro la calidad de don Fernando y la intención de don Luis,
determinaron entre ellos que los tres se volviesen a contar lo que pasaba a
su padre, y el otro se quedase a servir a don Luis, y a no dejalle hasta
que ellos volviesen por él, o viese lo que su padre les ordenaba.

Desta manera se apaciguó aquella máquina de pendencias, por la autoridad de
Agramante y prudencia del rey Sobrino; pero, viéndose el enemigo de la
concordia y el émulo de la paz menospreciado y burlado, y el poco fruto que
había granjeado de haberlos puesto a todos en tan confuso laberinto, acordó
de probar otra vez la mano, resucitando nuevas pendencias y desasosiegos.

Es, pues, el caso que los cuadrilleros se sosegaron, por haber entreoído la
calidad de los que con ellos se habían combatido, y se retiraron de la
pendencia, por parecerles que, de cualquiera manera que sucediese, habían
de llevar lo peor de la batalla; pero uno dellos, que fue el que fue molido
y pateado por don Fernando, le vino a la memoria que, entre algunos
mandamientos que traía para prender a algunos delincuentes, traía uno
contra don Quijote, a quien la Santa Hermandad había mandado prender, por
la libertad que dio a los galeotes, y como Sancho, con mucha razón, había
temido.

Imaginando, pues, esto, quiso certificarse si las señas que de don Quijote
traía venían bien, y, sacando del seno un pergamino, topó con el que
buscaba; y, poniéndosele a leer de espacio, porque no era buen lector, a
cada palabra que leía ponía los ojos en don Quijote, y iba cotejando las
señas del mandamiento con el rostro de don Quijote, y halló que, sin duda
alguna, era el que el mandamiento rezaba. Y, apenas se hubo certificado,
cuando, recogiendo su pergamino, en la izquierda tomó el mandamiento, y con
la derecha asió a don Quijote del cuello fuertemente, que no le dejaba
alentar, y a grandes voces decía:

-¡Favor a la Santa Hermandad! Y, para que se vea que lo pido de veras,
léase este mandamiento, donde se contiene que se prenda a este salteador de
caminos.

Tomó el mandamiento el cura, y vio como era verdad cuanto el cuadrillero
decía, y cómo convenía con las señas con don Quijote; el cual, viéndose
tratar mal de aquel villano malandrín, puesta la cólera en su punto y
crujiéndole los huesos de su cuerpo, como mejor pudo él, asió al
cuadrillero con entrambas manos de la garganta, que, a no ser socorrido de
sus compañeros, allí dejara la vida antes que don Quijote la presa. El
ventero, que por fuerza había de favorecer a los de su oficio, acudió luego
a dalle favor. La ventera, que vio de nuevo a su marido en pendencias, de
nuevo alzó la voz, cuyo tenor le llevaron luego Maritornes y su hija,
pidiendo favor al cielo y a los que allí estaban. Sancho dijo, viendo lo
que pasaba:

-¡Vive el Señor, que es verdad cuanto mi amo dice de los encantos deste
castillo, pues no es posible vivir una hora con quietud en él!

Don Fernando despartió al cuadrillero y a don Quijote, y, con gusto de
entrambos, les desenclavijó las manos, que el uno en el collar del sayo del
uno, y el otro en la garganta del otro, bien asidas tenían; pero no por
esto cesaban los cuadrilleros de pedir su preso, y que les ayudasen a
dársele atado y entregado a toda su voluntad, porque así convenía al
servicio del rey y de la Santa Hermandad, de cuya parte de nuevo les pedían
socorro y favor para hacer aquella prisión de aquel robador y salteador de
sendas y de carreras. Reíase de oír decir estas razones don Quijote; y, con
mucho sosiego, dijo:

-Venid acá, gente soez y malnacida: ¿saltear de caminos llamáis al dar
libertad a los encadenados, soltar los presos, acorrer a los miserables,
alzar los caídos, remediar los menesterosos? ¡Ah gente infame, digna por
vuestro bajo y vil entendimiento que el cielo no os comunique el valor que
se encierra en la caballería andante, ni os dé a entender el pecado e
ignorancia en que estáis en no reverenciar la sombra, cuanto más la
asistencia, de cualquier caballero andante! Venid acá, ladrones en
cuadrilla, que no cuadrilleros, salteadores de caminos con licencia de la
Santa Hermandad; decidme: ¿quién fue el ignorante que firmó mandamiento de
prisión contra un tal caballero como yo soy? ¿Quién el que ignoró que son
esentos de todo judicial fuero los caballeros andantes, y que su ley es su
espada; sus fueros, sus bríos; sus premáticas, su voluntad? ¿Quién fue el
mentecato, vuelvo a decir, que no sabe que no hay secutoria de hidalgo con
tantas preeminencias, ni esenciones, como la que adquiere un caballero
andante el día que se arma caballero y se entrega al duro ejercicio de la
caballería? ¿Qué caballero andante pagó pecho, alcabala, chapín de la
reina, moneda forera, portazgo ni barca? ¿Qué sastre le llevó hechura de
vestido que le hiciese? ¿Qué castellano le acogió en su castillo que le
hiciese pagar el escote? ¿Qué rey no le asentó a su mesa? ¿Qué doncella no
se le aficionó y se le entregó rendida, a todo su talante y voluntad? Y,
finalmente, ¿qué caballero andante ha habido, hay ni habrá en el mundo, que
no tenga bríos para dar él solo cuatrocientos palos a cuatrocientos
cuadrilleros que se le pongan delante?





Capítulo XLVI. De la notable aventura de los cuadrilleros, y la gran
ferocidad de nuestro buen caballero don Quijote


En tanto que don Quijote esto decía, estaba persuadiendo el cura a los
cuadrilleros como don Quijote era falto de juicio, como lo veían por sus
obras y por sus palabras, y que no tenían para qué llevar aquel negocio
adelante, pues, aunque le prendiesen y llevasen, luego le habían de dejar
por loco; a lo que respondió el del mandamiento que a él no tocaba juzgar
de la locura de don Quijote, sino hacer lo que por su mayor le era mandado,
y que una vez preso, siquiera le soltasen trecientas.

-Con todo eso -dijo el cura-, por esta vez no le habéis de llevar, ni aun
él dejará llevarse, a lo que yo entiendo.

En efeto, tanto les supo el cura decir, y tantas locuras supo don Quijote
hacer, que más locos fueran que no él los cuadrilleros si no conocieran la
falta de don Quijote; y así, tuvieron por bien de apaciguarse, y aun de ser
medianeros de hacer las paces entre el barbero y Sancho Panza, que todavía
asistían con gran rancor a su pendencia. Finalmente, ellos, como miembros
de justicia, mediaron la causa y fueron árbitros della, de tal modo que
ambas partes quedaron, si no del todo contentas, a lo menos en algo
satisfechas, porque se trocaron las albardas, y no las cinchas y jáquimas;
y en lo que tocaba a lo del yelmo de Mambrino, el cura, a socapa y sin que
don Quijote lo entendiese, le dio por la bacía ocho reales, y el barbero le
hizo una cédula del recibo y de no llamarse a engaño por entonces, ni por
siempre jamás amén.

Sosegadas, pues, estas dos pendencias, que eran las más principales y de
más tomo, restaba que los criados de don Luis se contentasen de volver los
tres, y que el uno quedase para acompañarle donde don Fernando le quería
llevar; y, como ya la buena suerte y mejor fortuna había comenzado a romper
lanzas y a facilitar dificultades en favor de los amantes de la venta y de
los valientes della, quiso llevarlo al cabo y dar a todo felice suceso,
porque los criados se contentaron de cuanto don Luis quería; de que recibió
tanto contento doña Clara, que ninguno en aquella sazón la mirara al rostro
que no conociera el regocijo de su alma.

Zoraida, aunque no entendía bien todos los sucesos que había visto, se
entristecía y alegraba a bulto, conforme veía y notaba los semblantes a
cada uno, especialmente de su español, en quien tenía siempre puestos los
ojos y traía colgada el alma. El ventero, a quien no se le pasó por alto
la dádiva y recompensa que el cura había hecho al barbero, pidió el escote
de don Quijote, con el menoscabo de sus cueros y falta de vino, jurando que
no saldría de la venta Rocinante, ni el jumento de Sancho, sin que se le
pagase primero hasta el último ardite. Todo lo apaciguó el cura, y lo pagó
don Fernando, puesto que el oidor, de muy buena voluntad, había también
ofrecido la paga; y de tal manera quedaron todos en paz y sosiego, que ya
no parecía la venta la discordia del campo de Agramante, como don Quijote
había dicho, sino la misma paz y quietud del tiempo de Otaviano; de todo lo
cual fue común opinión que se debían dar las gracias a la buena intención y
mucha elocuencia del señor cura y a la incomparable liberalidad de don
Fernando.

Viéndose, pues, don Quijote libre y desembarazado de tantas pendencias, así
de su escudero como suyas, le pareció que sería bien seguir su comenzado
viaje y dar fin a aquella grande aventura para que había sido llamado y
escogido; y así, con resoluta determinación se fue a poner de hinojos ante
Dorotea, la cual no le consintió que hablase palabra hasta que se
levantase; y él, por obedecella, se puso en pie y le dijo:

-Es común proverbio, fermosa señora, que la diligencia es madre de la buena
ventura, y en muchas y graves cosas ha mostrado la experiencia que la
solicitud del negociante trae a buen fin el pleito dudoso; pero en ningunas
cosas se muestra más esta verdad que en las de la guerra, adonde la
celeridad y presteza previene los discursos del enemigo, y alcanza la
vitoria antes que el contrario se ponga en defensa. Todo esto digo, alta y
preciosa señora, porque me parece que la estada nuestra en este castillo ya
es sin provecho, y podría sernos de tanto daño que lo echásemos de ver
algún día; porque, ¿quién sabe si por ocultas espías y diligentes habrá
sabido ya vuestro enemigo el gigante de que yo voy a destruille?; y,
dándole lugar el tiempo, se fortificase en algún inexpugnable castillo o
fortaleza contra quien valiesen poco mis diligencias y la fuerza de mi
incansable brazo. Así que, señora mía, prevengamos, como tengo dicho, con
nuestra diligencia sus designios, y partámonos luego a la buena ventura;
que no está más de tenerla vuestra grandeza como desea, de cuanto yo tarde
de verme con vuestro contrario.

Calló y no dijo más don Quijote, y esperó con mucho sosiego la respuesta de
la fermosa infanta; la cual, con ademán señoril y acomodado al estilo de
don Quijote, le respondió desta manera:

-Yo os agradezco, señor caballero, el deseo que mostráis tener de
favorecerme en mi gran cuita, bien así como caballero, a quien es anejo y
concerniente favorecer los huérfanos y menesterosos; y quiera el cielo que
el vuestro y mi deseo se cumplan, para que veáis que hay agradecidas
mujeres en el mundo. Y en lo de mi partida, sea luego; que yo no tengo más
voluntad que la vuestra: disponed vos de mí a toda vuestra guisa y talante;
que la que una vez os entregó la defensa de su persona y puso en vuestras
manos la restauración de sus señoríos no ha de querer ir contra lo que la
vuestra prudencia ordenare.

-A la mano de Dios -dijo don Quijote-; pues así es que una señora se me
humilla, no quiero yo perder la ocasión de levantalla y ponella en su
heredado trono. La partida sea luego, porque me va poniendo espuelas al
deseo y al camino lo que suele decirse que en la tardanza está el peligro.
Y, pues no ha criado el cielo, ni visto el infierno, ninguno que me espante
ni acobarde, ensilla, Sancho, a Rocinante, y apareja tu jumento y el
palafrén de la reina, y despidámonos del castellano y destos señores, y
vamos de aquí luego al punto.

Sancho, que a todo estaba presente, dijo, meneando la cabeza a una parte y
a otra:

-¡Ay señor, señor, y cómo hay más mal en el aldegüela que se suena, con
perdón sea dicho de las tocadas honradas!

-¿Qué mal puede haber en ninguna aldea, ni en todas las ciudades del mundo,
que pueda sonarse en menoscabo mío, villano?

-Si vuestra merced se enoja -respondió Sancho-, yo callaré, y dejaré de
decir lo que soy obligado como buen escudero, y como debe un buen criado
decir a su señor.

-Di lo que quisieres -replicó don Quijote-, como tus palabras no se
encaminen a ponerme miedo; que si tú le tienes, haces como quien eres, y si
yo no le tengo, hago como quien soy.

-No es eso, ¡pecador fui yo a Dios! -respondió Sancho-, sino que yo tengo
por cierto y por averiguado que esta señora que se dice ser reina del gran
reino Micomicón no lo es más que mi madre; porque, a ser lo que ella dice,
no se anduviera hocicando con alguno de los que están en la rueda, a vuelta
de cabeza y a cada traspuesta.

Paróse colorada con las razones de Sancho Dorotea, porque era verdad que su
esposo don Fernando, alguna vez, a hurto de otros ojos, había cogido con
los labios parte del premio que merecían sus deseos (lo cual había visto
Sancho, y pareciéndole que aquella desenvoltura más era de dama cortesana
que de reina de tan gran reino), y no pudo ni quiso responder palabra a
Sancho, sino dejóle proseguir en su plática, y él fue diciendo:

-Esto digo, señor, porque, si al cabo de haber andado caminos y carreras, y
pasado malas noches y peores días, ha de venir a coger el fruto de nuestros
trabajos el que se está holgando en esta venta, no hay para qué darme
priesa a que ensille a Rocinante, albarde el jumento y aderece al palafrén,
pues será mejor que nos estemos quedos, y cada puta hile, y comamos.

¡Oh, válame Dios, y cuán grande que fue el enojo que recibió don Quijote,
oyendo las descompuestas palabras de su escudero! Digo que fue tanto, que,
con voz atropellada y tartamuda lengua, lanzando vivo fuego por los ojos,
dijo:

-¡Oh bellaco villano, mal mirado, descompuesto, ignorante, infacundo,
deslenguado, atrevido, murmurador y maldiciente! ¿Tales palabras has osado
decir en mi presencia y en la destas ínclitas señoras, y tales
deshonestidades y atrevimientos osaste poner en tu confusa imaginación?
¡Vete de mi presencia, monstruo de naturaleza, depositario de mentiras,
almario de embustes, silo de bellaquerías, inventor de maldades, publicador
de sandeces, enemigo del decoro que se debe a las reales personas! ¡Vete;
no parezcas delante de mí, so pena de mi ira!

Y, diciendo esto, enarcó las cejas, hinchó los carrillos, miró a todas
partes, y dio con el pie derecho una gran patada en el suelo, señales todas
de la ira que encerraba en sus entrañas. A cuyas palabras y furibundos
ademanes quedó Sancho tan encogido y medroso, que se holgara que en aquel
instante se abriera debajo de sus pies la tierra y le tragara. Y no supo
qué hacerse, sino volver las espaldas y quitarse de la enojada presencia de
su señor. Pero la discreta Dorotea, que tan entendido tenía ya el humor de
don Quijote, dijo, para templarle la ira:

-No os despechéis, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, de las sandeces que
vuestro buen escudero ha dicho, porque quizá no las debe de decir sin
ocasión, ni de su buen entendimiento y cristiana conciencia se puede
sospechar que levante testimonio a nadie; y así, se ha de creer, sin poner
duda en ello, que, como en este castillo, según vos, señor caballero,
decís, todas las cosas van y suceden por modo de encantamento, podría ser,
digo, que Sancho hubiese visto por esta diabólica vía lo que él dice que
vio, tan en ofensa de mi honestidad.

-Por el omnipotente Dios juro -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, que la
vuestra grandeza ha dado en el punto, y que alguna mala visión se le puso
delante a este pecador de Sancho, que le hizo ver lo que fuera imposible
verse de otro modo que por el de encantos no fuera; que sé yo bien de la
bondad e inocencia deste desdichado, que no sabe levantar testimonios a
nadie.

-Ansí es y ansí será -dijo don Fernando-; por lo cual debe vuestra merced,
señor don Quijote, perdonalle y reducille al gremio de su gracia, sicut
erat in principio, antes que las tales visiones le sacasen de juicio.

Don Quijote respondió que él le perdonaba, y el cura fue por Sancho, el
cual vino muy humilde, y, hincándose de rodillas, pidió la mano a su amo; y
él se la dio, y, después de habérsela dejado besar, le echó la bendición,
diciendo:

-Agora acabarás de conocer, Sancho hijo, ser verdad lo que yo otras muchas
veces te he dicho de que todas las cosas deste castillo son hechas por vía
de encantamento.

-Así lo creo yo -dijo Sancho-, excepto aquello de la manta, que realmente
sucedió por vía ordinaria.

-No lo creas -respondió don Quijote-; que si así fuera, yo te vengara
entonces, y aun agora; pero ni entonces ni agora pude ni vi en quién tomar
venganza de tu agravio.

Desearon saber todos qué era aquello de la manta, y el ventero lo contó,
punto por punto: la volatería de Sancho Panza, de que no poco se rieron
todos; y de que no menos se corriera Sancho, si de nuevo no le asegurara su
amo que era encantamento; puesto que jamás llegó la sandez de Sancho a
tanto, que creyese no ser verdad pura y averiguada, sin mezcla de engaño
alguno, lo de haber sido manteado por personas de carne y hueso, y no por
fantasmas soñadas ni imaginadas, como su señor lo creía y lo afirmaba.

Dos días eran ya pasados los que había que toda aquella ilustre compañía
estaba en la venta; y, pareciéndoles que ya era tiempo de partirse, dieron
orden para que, sin ponerse al trabajo de volver Dorotea y don Fernando con
don Quijote a su aldea, con la invención de la libertad de la reina
Micomicona, pudiesen el cura y el barbero llevársele, como deseaban, y
procurar la cura de su locura en su tierra. Y lo que ordenaron fue que se
concertaron con un carretero de bueyes que acaso acertó a pasar por allí,
para que lo llevase en esta forma: hicieron una como jaula de palos
enrejados, capaz que pudiese en ella caber holgadamente don Quijote; y
luego don Fernando y sus camaradas, con los criados de don Luis y los
cuadrilleros, juntamente con el ventero, todos por orden y parecer del
cura, se cubrieron los rostros y se disfrazaron, quién de una manera y
quién de otra, de modo que a don Quijote le pareciese ser otra gente de la
que en aquel castillo había visto.

Hecho esto, con grandísimo silencio se entraron adonde él estaba durmiendo
y descansando de las pasadas refriegas. Llegáronse a él, que libre y seguro
de tal acontecimiento dormía, y, asiéndole fuertemente, le ataron muy bien
las manos y los pies, de modo que, cuando él despertó con sobresalto, no
pudo menearse, ni hacer otra cosa más que admirarse y suspenderse de ver
delante de sí tan estraños visajes; y luego dio en la cuenta de lo que su
continua y desvariada imaginación le representaba, y se creyó que todas
aquellas figuras eran fantasmas de aquel encantado castillo, y que, sin
duda alguna, ya estaba encantado, pues no se podía menear ni defender: todo
a punto como había pensado que sucedería el cura, trazador desta máquina.
Sólo Sancho, de todos los presentes, estaba en su mesmo juicio y en su
mesma figura; el cual, aunque le faltaba bien poco para tener la mesma
enfermedad de su amo, no dejó de conocer quién eran todas aquellas
contrahechas figuras; mas no osó descoser su boca, hasta ver en qué paraba
aquel asalto y prisión de su amo, el cual tampoco hablaba palabra,
atendiendo a ver el paradero de su desgracia; que fue que, trayendo allí la
jaula, le encerraron dentro, y le clavaron los maderos tan fuertemente que
no se pudieran romper a dos tirones.

Tomáronle luego en hombros, y, al salir del aposento, se oyó una voz
temerosa, todo cuanto la supo formar el barbero, no el del albarda, sino el
otro, que decía:

-¡Oh Caballero de la Triste Figura!, no te dé afincamiento la prisión en
que vas, porque así conviene para acabar más presto la aventura en que tu
gran esfuerzo te puso; la cual se acabará cuando el furibundo león manchado
con la blanca paloma tobosina yoguieren en uno, ya después de
humilladas las altas cervices al blando yugo matrimoñesco; de cuyo inaudito
consorcio saldrán a la luz del orbe los bravos cachorros, que imitarán las
rumpantes garras del valeroso padre. Y esto será antes que el seguidor de
la fugitiva ninfa faga dos vegadas la visita de las lucientes imágines con
su rápido y natural curso. Y tú, ¡oh, el más noble y obediente escudero que
tuvo espada en cinta, barbas en rostro y olfato en las narices!, no te
desmaye ni descontente ver llevar ansí delante de tus ojos mesmos a la flor
de la caballería andante; que presto, si al plasmador del mundo le place,
te verás tan alto y tan sublimado que no te conozcas, y no saldrán
defraudadas las promesas que te ha fecho tu buen señor. Y asegúrote, de
parte de la sabia Mentironiana, que tu salario te sea pagado, como lo verás
por la obra; y sigue las pisadas del valeroso y encantado caballero, que
conviene que vayas donde paréis entrambos. Y, porque no me es lícito decir
otra cosa, a Dios quedad, que yo me vuelvo adonde yo me sé.

Y, al acabar de la profecía, alzó la voz de punto, y diminuyóla después,
con tan tierno acento, que aun los sabidores de la burla estuvieron por
creer que era verdad lo que oían.

Quedó don Quijote consolado con la escuchada profecía, porque luego coligió
de todo en todo la significación de ella; y vio que le prometían el verse
ayuntados en santo y debido matrimonio con su querida Dulcinea del Toboso,
de cuyo felice vientre saldrían los cachorros, que eran sus hijos, para
gloria perpetua de la Mancha. Y, creyendo esto bien y firmemente, alzó la
voz, y, dando un gran suspiro, dijo:

-¡Oh tú, quienquiera que seas, que tanto bien me has pronosticado!, ruégote
que pidas de mi parte al sabio encantador que mis cosas tiene a cargo, que
no me deje perecer en esta prisión donde agora me llevan, hasta ver
cumplidas tan alegres e incomparables promesas como son las que aquí se me
han hecho; que, como esto sea, tendré por gloria las penas de mi cárcel, y
por alivio estas cadenas que me ciñen, y no por duro campo de batalla este
lecho en que me acuestan, sino por cama blanda y tálamo dichoso. Y, en lo
que toca a la consolación de Sancho Panza, mi escudero, yo confío de su
bondad y buen proceder que no me dejará en buena ni en mala suerte; porque,
cuando no suceda, por la suya o por mi corta ventura, el poderle yo dar la
ínsula, o otra cosa equivalente que le tengo prometida, por lo menos su
salario no podrá perderse; que en mi testamento, que ya está hecho, dejo
declarado lo que se le ha de dar, no conforme a sus muchos y buenos
servicios, sino a la posibilidad mía.

Sancho Panza se le inclinó con mucho comedimiento, y le besó entrambas las
manos, porque la una no pudiera, por estar atadas entrambas.

Luego tomaron la jaula en hombros aquellas visiones, y la acomodaron en el
carro de los bueyes.





Capítulo XLVII. Del estraño modo con que fue encantado don Quijote de la
Mancha, con otros famosos sucesos


Cuando don Quijote se vio de aquella manera enjaulado y encima del carro,
dijo:

-Muchas y muy graves historias he yo leído de caballeros andantes, pero
jamás he leído, ni visto, ni oído, que a los caballeros encantados los
lleven desta manera y con el espacio que prometen estos perezosos y tardíos
animales; porque siempre los suelen llevar por los aires, con estraña
ligereza, encerrados en alguna parda y escura nube, o en algún carro de
fuego, o ya sobre algún hipogrifo o otra bestia semejante; pero que me
lleven a mí agora sobre un carro de bueyes, ¡vive Dios que me pone en
confusión! Pero quizá la caballería y los encantos destos nuestros tiempos
deben de seguir otro camino que siguieron los antiguos. Y también podría
ser que, como yo soy nuevo caballero en el mundo, y el primero que ha
resucitado el ya olvidado ejercicio de la caballería aventurera, también
nuevamente se hayan inventado otros géneros de encantamentos y otros modos
de llevar a los encantados. ¿Qué te parece desto, Sancho hijo?

-No sé yo lo que me parece -respondió Sancho-, por no ser tan leído como
vuestra merced en las escrituras andantes; pero, con todo eso, osaría
afirmar y jurar que estas visiones que por aquí andan, que no son del todo
católicas.

-¿Católicas? ¡Mi padre! -respondió don Quijote-. ¿Cómo han de ser católicas
si son todos demonios que han tomado cuerpos fantásticos para venir a hacer
esto y a ponerme en este estado? Y si quieres ver esta verdad, tócalos y
pálpalos, y verás como no tienen cuerpo sino de aire, y como no consiste
más de en la apariencia.

-Par Dios, señor -replicó Sancho-, ya yo los he tocado; y este diablo que
aquí anda tan solícito es rollizo de carnes, y tiene otra propiedad muy
diferente de la que yo he oído decir que tienen los demonios; porque, según
se dice, todos huelen a piedra azufre y a otros malos olores; pero éste
huele a ámbar de media legua.

Decía esto Sancho por don Fernando, que, como tan señor, debía de oler a lo
que Sancho decía.

-No te maravilles deso, Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, porque te
hago saber que los diablos saben mucho, y, puesto que traigan olores
consigo, ellos no huelen nada, porque son espíritus, y si huelen, no pueden
oler cosas buenas, sino malas y hidiondas. Y la razón es que como ellos,
dondequiera que están, traen el infierno consigo, y no pueden recebir
género de alivio alguno en sus tormentos, y el buen olor sea cosa que
deleita y contenta, no es posible que ellos huelan cosa buena. Y si a ti te
parece que ese demonio que dices huele a ámbar, o tú te engañas, o él
quiere engañarte con hacer que no le tengas por demonio.

Todos estos coloquios pasaron entre amo y criado; y, temiendo don Fernando
y Cardenio que Sancho no viniese a caer del todo en la cuenta de su
invención, a quien andaba ya muy en los alcances, determinaron de abreviar
con la partida; y, llamando aparte al ventero, le ordenaron que ensillase a
Rocinante y enalbardase el jumento de Sancho; el cual lo hizo con mucha
presteza.

Ya en esto, el cura se había concertado con los cuadrilleros que le
acompañasen hasta su lugar, dándoles un tanto cada día. Colgó Cardenio del
arzón de la silla de Rocinante, del un cabo la adarga y del otro la bacía,
y por señas mandó a Sancho que subiese en su asno y tomase de las riendas
a Rocinante, y puso a los dos lados del carro a los dos cuadrilleros con
sus escopetas. Pero, antes que se moviese el carro, salió la ventera, su
hija y Maritornes a despedirse de don Quijote, fingiendo que lloraban de
dolor de su desgracia; a quien don Quijote dijo:

-No lloréis, mis buenas señoras, que todas estas desdichas son anexas a los
que profesan lo que yo profeso; y si estas calamidades no me acontecieran,
no me tuviera yo por famoso caballero andante; porque a los caballeros de
poco nombre y fama nunca les suceden semejantes casos, porque no hay en el
mundo quien se acuerde dellos. A los valerosos sí, que tienen envidiosos de
su virtud y valentía a muchos príncipes y a muchos otros caballeros, que
procuran por malas vías destruir a los buenos. Pero, con todo eso, la
virtud es tan poderosa que, por sí sola, a pesar de toda la nigromancia que
supo su primer inventor, Zoroastes, saldrá vencedora de todo trance, y dará
de sí luz en el mundo, como la da el sol en el cielo. Perdonadme, fermosas
damas, si algún desaguisado, por descuido mío, os he fecho, que, de
voluntad y a sabiendas, jamás le di a nadie; y rogad a Dios me saque destas
prisiones, donde algún mal intencionado encantador me ha puesto; que si de
ellas me veo libre, no se me caerá de la memoria las mercedes que en este
castillo me habedes fecho, para gratificallas, servillas y recompensallas
como ellas merecen.

En tanto que las damas del castillo esto pasaban con don Quijote, el cura y
el barbero se despidieron de don Fernando y sus camaradas, y del capitán y
de su hermano y todas aquellas contentas señoras, especialmente de Dorotea
y Luscinda. Todos se abrazaron y quedaron de darse noticia de sus sucesos,
diciendo don Fernando al cura dónde había de escribirle para avisarle en lo
que paraba don Quijote, asegurándole que no habría cosa que más gusto le
diese que saberlo; y que él, asimesmo, le avisaría de todo aquello que él
viese que podría darle gusto, así de su casamiento como del bautismo de
Zoraida, y suceso de don Luis, y vuelta de Luscinda a su casa. El cura
ofreció de hacer cuanto se le mandaba, con toda puntualidad. Tornaron a
abrazarse otra vez, y otra vez tornaron a nuevos ofrecimientos.

El ventero se llegó al cura y le dio unos papeles, diciéndole que los había
hallado en un aforro de la maleta donde se halló la Novela del curioso
impertinente, y que, pues su dueño no había vuelto más por allí, que se los
llevase todos; que, pues él no sabía leer, no los quería. El cura se lo
agradeció, y, abriéndolos luego, vio que al principio de lo escrito decía:
Novela de Rinconete y Cortadillo, por donde entendió ser alguna novela y
coligió que, pues la del Curioso impertinente había sido buena, que también
lo sería aquélla, pues podría ser fuesen todas de un mesmo autor; y así, la
guardó, con prosupuesto de leerla cuando tuviese comodidad.

Subió a caballo, y también su amigo el barbero, con sus antifaces, porque
no fuesen luego conocidos de don Quijote, y pusiéronse a caminar tras el
carro. Y la orden que llevaban era ésta: iba primero el carro, guiándole su
dueño; a los dos lados iban los cuadrilleros, como se ha dicho, con sus
escopetas; seguía luego Sancho Panza sobre su asno, llevando de rienda a
Rocinante. Detrás de todo esto iban el cura y el barbero sobre sus
poderosas mulas, cubiertos los rostros, como se ha dicho, con grave y
reposado continente, no caminando más de lo que permitía el paso tardo de
los bueyes. Don Quijote iba sentado en la jaula, las manos atadas, tendidos
los pies, y arrimado a las verjas, con tanto silencio y tanta paciencia
como si no fuera hombre de carne, sino estatua de piedra.

Y así, con aquel espacio y silencio caminaron hasta dos leguas, que
llegaron a un valle, donde le pareció al boyero ser lugar acomodado para
reposar y dar pasto a los bueyes; y, comunicándolo con el cura, fue de
parecer el barbero que caminasen un poco más, porque él sabía, detrás de un
recuesto que cerca de allí se mostraba, había un valle de más yerba y mucho
mejor que aquel donde parar querían. Tomóse el parecer del barbero, y así,
tornaron a proseguir su camino.

En esto, volvió el cura el rostro, y vio que a sus espaldas venían hasta
seis o siete hombres de a caballo, bien puestos y aderezados, de los cuales
fueron presto alcanzados, porque caminaban no con la flema y reposo de los
bueyes, sino como quien iba sobre mulas de canónigos y con deseo de llegar
presto a sestear a la venta, que menos de una legua de allí se parecía.
Llegaron los diligentes a los perezosos y saludáronse cortésmente; y uno de
los que venían, que, en resolución, era canónigo de Toledo y señor de los
demás que le acompañaban, viendo la concertada procesión del carro,
cuadrilleros, Sancho, Rocinante, cura y barbero, y más a don Quijote,
enjaulado y aprisionado, no pudo dejar de preguntar qué significaba llevar
aquel hombre de aquella manera; aunque ya se había dado a entender, viendo
las insignias de los cuadrilleros, que debía de ser algún facinoroso
salteador, o otro delincuente cuyo castigo tocase a la Santa Hermandad. Uno
de los cuadrilleros, a quien fue hecha la pregunta, respondió ansí:

-Señor, lo que significa ir este caballero desta manera, dígalo él, porque
nosotros no lo sabemos.

Oyó don Quijote la plática, y dijo:

-¿Por dicha vuestras mercedes, señores caballeros, son versados y perictos
en esto de la caballería andante? Porque si lo son, comunicaré con ellos
mis desgracias, y si no, no hay para qué me canse en decillas.

Y, a este tiempo, habían ya llegado el cura y el barbero, viendo que los
caminantes estaban en pláticas con don Quijote de la Mancha, para responder
de modo que no fuese descubierto su artificio.

El canónigo, a lo que don Quijote dijo, respondió:

-En verdad, hermano, que sé más de libros de caballerías que de las Súmulas
de Villalpando. Ansí que, si no está más que en esto, seguramente podéis
comunicar conmigo lo que quisiéredes.

-A la mano de Dios -replicó don Quijote-. Pues así es, quiero, señor
caballero, que sepades que yo voy encantado en esta jaula, por envidia y
fraude de malos encantadores; que la virtud más es perseguida de los malos
que amada de los buenos. Caballero andante soy, y no de aquellos de cuyos
nombres jamás la Fama se acordó para eternizarlos en su memoria, sino de
aquellos que, a despecho y pesar de la mesma envidia, y de cuantos magos
crió Persia, bracmanes la India, ginosofistas la Etiopía, ha de poner su
nombre en el templo de la inmortalidad para que sirva de ejemplo y dechado
en los venideros siglos, donde los caballeros andantes vean los pasos que
han de seguir, si quisieren llegar a la cumbre y alteza honrosa de las
armas.

-Dice verdad el señor don Quijote de la Mancha -dijo a esta sazón el cura-;
que él va encantado en esta carreta, no por sus culpas y pecados, sino por
la mala intención de aquellos a quien la virtud enfada y la valentía enoja.
Éste es, señor, el Caballero de la Triste Figura, si ya le oístes nombrar
en algún tiempo, cuyas valerosas hazañas y grandes hechos serán escritas
en bronces duros y en eternos mármoles, por más que se canse la envidia en
escurecerlos y la malicia en ocultarlos.

Cuando el canónigo oyó hablar al preso y al libre en semejante estilo,
estuvo por hacerse la cruz, de admirado, y no podía saber lo que le había
acontencido; y en la mesma admiración cayeron todos los que con él venían.
En esto, Sancho Panza, que se había acercado a oír la plática, para
adobarlo todo, dijo:

-Ahora, señores, quiéranme bien o quiéranme mal por lo que dijere, el caso
de ello es que así va encantado mi señor don Quijote como mi madre; él
tiene su entero juicio, él come y bebe y hace sus necesidades como los
demás hombres, y como las hacía ayer, antes que le enjaulasen. Siendo esto
ansí, ¿cómo quieren hacerme a mí entender que va encantado? Pues yo he oído
decir a muchas personas que los encantados ni comen, ni duermen, ni hablan,
y mi amo, si no le van a la mano, hablará más que treinta procuradores.

Y, volviéndose a mirar al cura, prosiguió diciendo:

-¡Ah señor cura, señor cura! ¿Pensaba vuestra merced que no le conozco, y
pensará que yo no calo y adivino adónde se encaminan estos nuevos
encantamentos? Pues sepa que le conozco, por más que se encubra el rostro,
y sepa que le entiendo, por más que disimule sus embustes. En fin, donde
reina la envidia no puede vivir la virtud, ni adonde hay escaseza la
liberalidad. !Mal haya el diablo!; que, si por su reverencia no fuera, ésta
fuera ya la hora que mi señor estuviera casado con la infanta Micomicona, y
yo fuera conde, por lo menos, pues no se podía esperar otra cosa, así de la
bondad de mi señor el de la Triste Figura como de la grandeza de mis
servicios. Pero ya veo que es verdad lo que se dice por ahí: que la rueda
de la Fortuna anda más lista que una rueda de molino, y que los que ayer
estaban en pinganitos hoy están por el suelo. De mis hijos y de mi mujer me
pesa, pues cuando podían y debían esperar ver entrar a su padre por sus
puertas hecho gobernador o visorrey de alguna ínsula o reino, le verán
entrar hecho mozo de caballos. Todo esto que he dicho, señor cura, no es
más de por encarecer a su paternidad haga conciencia del mal tratamiento
que a mi señor se le hace, y mire bien no le pida Dios en la otra vida esta
prisión de mi amo, y se le haga cargo de todos aquellos socorros y bienes
que mi señor don Quijote deja de hacer en este tiempo que está preso.

-¡Adóbame esos candiles! -dijo a este punto el barbero-. ¿También vos,
Sancho, sois de la cofradía de vuestro amo? ¡Vive el Señor, que voy viendo
que le habéis de tener compañía en la jaula, y que habéis de quedar tan
encantado como él, por lo que os toca de su humor y de su caballería! En
mal punto os empreñastes de sus promesas, y en mal hora se os entró en los
cascos la ínsula que tanto deseáis.

-Yo no estoy preñado de nadie -respondió Sancho-, ni soy hombre que me
dejaría empreñar, del rey que fuese; y, aunque pobre, soy cristiano viejo,
y no debo nada a nadie; y si ínsulas deseo, otros desean otras cosas
peores; y cada uno es hijo de sus obras; y, debajo de ser hombre, puedo
venir a ser papa, cuanto más gobernador de una ínsula, y más pudiendo ganar
tantas mi señor que le falte a quien dallas. Vuestra merced mire cómo
habla, señor barbero; que no es todo hacer barbas, y algo va de Pedro a
Pedro. Dígolo porque todos nos conocemos, y a mí no se me ha de echar dado
falso. Y en esto del encanto de mi amo, Dios sabe la verdad; y quédese
aquí, porque es peor meneallo.

No quiso responder el barbero a Sancho, porque no descubriese con sus
simplicidades lo que él y el cura tanto procuraban encubrir; y, por este
mesmo temor, había el cura dicho al canónigo que caminasen un poco delante:
que él le diría el misterio del enjaulado, con otras cosas que le diesen
gusto. Hízolo así el canónigo, y adelantóse con sus criados y con él:
estuvo atento a todo aquello que decirle quiso de la condición, vida,
locura y costumbres de don Quijote, contándole brevemente el principio y
causa de su desvarío, y todo el progreso de sus sucesos, hasta haberlo
puesto en aquella jaula, y el disignio que llevaban de llevarle a su
tierra, para ver si por algún medio hallaban remedio a su locura.
Admiráronse de nuevo los criados y el canónigo de oír la peregrina historia
de don Quijote, y, en acabándola de oír, dijo:

-Verdaderamente, señor cura, yo hallo por mi cuenta que son perjudiciales
en la república estos que llaman libros de caballerías; y, aunque he leído,
llevado de un ocioso y falso gusto, casi el principio de todos los más que
hay impresos, jamás me he podido acomodar a leer ninguno del principio al
cabo, porque me parece que, cuál más, cuál menos, todos ellos son una mesma
cosa, y no tiene más éste que aquél, ni estotro que el otro. Y, según a mí
me parece, este género de escritura y composición cae debajo de aquel de
las fábulas que llaman milesias, que son cuentos disparatados, que atienden
solamente a deleitar, y no a enseñar: al contrario de lo que hacen las
fábulas apólogas, que deleitan y enseñan juntamente. Y, puesto que el
principal intento de semejantes libros sea el deleitar, no sé yo cómo
puedan conseguirle, yendo llenos de tantos y tan desaforados disparates;
que el deleite que en el alma se concibe ha de ser de la hermosura y
concordancia que vee o contempla en las cosas que la vista o la imaginación
le ponen delante; y toda cosa que tiene en sí fealdad y descompostura no
nos puede causar contento alguno. Pues, ¿qué hermosura puede haber, o qué
proporción de partes con el todo y del todo con las partes, en un libro o
fábula donde un mozo de diez y seis años da una cuchillada a un gigante
como una torre, y le divide en dos mitades, como si fuera de alfeñique; y
que, cuando nos quieren pintar una batalla, después de haber dicho que hay
de la parte de los enemigos un millón de competientes, como sea contra
ellos el señor del libro, forzosamente, mal que nos pese, habemos de
entender que el tal caballero alcanzó la vitoria por solo el valor de su
fuerte brazo? Pues, ¿qué diremos de la facilidad con que una reina o
emperatriz heredera se conduce en los brazos de un andante y no conocido
caballero? ¿Qué ingenio, si no es del todo bárbaro e inculto, podrá
contentarse leyendo que una gran torre llena de caballeros va por la mar
adelante, como nave con próspero viento, y hoy anochece en Lombardía, y
mañana amanezca en tierras del Preste Juan de las Indias, o en otras que ni
las descubrió Tolomeo ni las vio Marco Polo? Y, si a esto se me respondiese
que los que tales libros componen los escriben como cosas de mentira, y que
así, no están obligados a mirar en delicadezas ni verdades, responderles
hía yo que tanto la mentira es mejor cuanto más parece verdadera, y tanto
más agrada cuanto tiene más de lo dudoso y posible. Hanse de casar las
fábulas mentirosas con el entendimiento de los que las leyeren,
escribiéndose de suerte que, facilitando los imposibles, allanando las
grandezas, suspendiendo los ánimos, admiren, suspendan, alborocen y
entretengan, de modo que anden a un mismo paso la admiración y la alegría
juntas; y todas estas cosas no podrá hacer el que huyere de la
verisimilitud y de la imitación, en quien consiste la perfeción de lo que
se escribe. No he visto ningún libro de caballerías que haga un cuerpo de
fábula entero con todos sus miembros, de manera que el medio corresponda al
principio, y el fin al principio y al medio; sino que los componen con
tantos miembros, que más parece que llevan intención a formar una quimera o
un monstruo que a hacer una figura proporcionada. Fuera desto, son en el
estilo duros; en las hazañas, increíbles; en los amores, lascivos; en las
cortesías, mal mirados; largos en las batallas, necios en las razones,
disparatados en los viajes, y, finalmente, ajenos de todo discreto
artificio, y por esto dignos de ser desterrados de la república cristiana,
como a gente inútil.

El cura le estuvo escuchando con grande atención, y parecióle hombre de
buen entendimiento, y que tenía razón en cuanto decía; y así, le dijo que,
por ser él de su mesma opinión y tener ojeriza a los libros de caballerías,
había quemado todos los de don Quijote, que eran muchos. Y contóle el
escrutinio que dellos había hecho, y los que había condenado al fuego y
dejado con vida, de que no poco se rió el canónigo, y dijo que, con todo
cuanto mal había dicho de tales libros, hallaba en ellos una cosa buena:
que era el sujeto que ofrecían para que un buen entendimiento pudiese
mostrarse en ellos, porque daban largo y espacioso campo por donde sin
empacho alguno pudiese correr la pluma, descubriendo naufragios, tormentas,
rencuentros y batallas; pintando un capitán valeroso con todas las partes
que para ser tal se requieren, mostrándose prudente previniendo las
astucias de sus enemigos, y elocuente orador persuadiendo o disuadiendo a
sus soldados, maduro en el consejo, presto en lo determinado, tan valiente
en el esperar como en el acometer; pintando ora un lamentable y trágico
suceso, ahora un alegre y no pensado acontecimiento; allí una hermosísima
dama, honesta, discreta y recatada; aquí un caballero cristiano, valiente y
comedido; acullá un desaforado bárbaro fanfarrón; acá un príncipe cortés,
valeroso y bien mirado; representando bondad y lealtad de vasallos,
grandezas y mercedes de señores. Ya puede mostrarse astrólogo, ya
cosmógrafo excelente, ya músico, ya inteligente en las materias de estado,
y tal vez le vendrá ocasión de mostrarse nigromante, si quisiere. Puede
mostrar las astucias de Ulixes, la piedad de Eneas, la valentía de Aquiles,
las desgracias de Héctor, las traiciones de Sinón, la amistad de Eurialio,
la liberalidad de Alejandro, el valor de César, la clemencia y verdad de
Trajano, la fidelidad de Zopiro, la prudencia de Catón; y, finalmente,
todas aquellas acciones que pueden hacer perfecto a un varón ilustre, ahora
poniéndolas en uno solo, ahora dividiéndolas en muchos.

-Y, siendo esto hecho con apacibilidad de estilo y con ingeniosa invención,
que tire lo más que fuere posible a la verdad, sin duda compondrá una tela
de varios y hermosos lazos tejida, que, después de acabada, tal perfeción y
hermosura muestre, que consiga el fin mejor que se pretende en los
escritos, que es enseñar y deleitar juntamente, como ya tengo dicho. Porque
la escritura desatada destos libros da lugar a que el autor pueda mostrarse
épico, lírico, trágico, cómico, con todas aquellas partes que encierran en
sí las dulcísimas y agradables ciencias de la poesía y de la oratoria; que
la épica también puede escrebirse en prosa como en verso.





Capítulo XLVIII. Donde prosigue el canónigo la materia de los libros de
caballerías, con otras cosas dignas de su ingenio


-Así es como vuestra merced dice, señor canónigo -dijo el cura-, y por esta
causa son más dignos de reprehensión los que hasta aquí han compuesto
semejantes libros sin tener advertencia a ningún buen discurso, ni al arte
y reglas por donde pudieran guiarse y hacerse famosos en prosa, como lo son
en verso los dos príncipes de la poesía griega y latina.

-Yo, a lo menos -replicó el canónigo-, he tenido cierta tentación de hacer
un libro de caballerías, guardando en él todos los puntos que he
significado; y si he de confesar la verdad, tengo escritas más de cien
hojas. Y para hacer la experiencia de si correspondían a mi estimación, las
he comunicado con hombres apasionados desta leyenda, dotos y discretos, y
con otros ignorantes, que sólo atienden al gusto de oír disparates, y de
todos he hallado una agradable aprobación; pero, con todo esto, no he
proseguido adelante, así por parecerme que hago cosa ajena de mi profesión,
como por ver que es más el número de los simples que de los prudentes; y
que, puesto que es mejor ser loado de los pocos sabios que burlado de los
muchos necios, no quiero sujetarme al confuso juicio del desvanecido vulgo,
a quien por la mayor parte toca leer semejantes libros. Pero lo que más me
le quitó de las manos, y aun del pensamiento, de acabarle, fue un argumento
que hice conmigo mesmo, sacado de las comedias que ahora se representa,
diciendo: ''Si estas que ahora se usan, así las imaginadas como las de
historia, todas o las más son conocidos disparates y cosas que no llevan
pies ni cabeza, y, con todo eso, el vulgo las oye con gusto, y las tiene y
las aprueba por buenas, estando tan lejos de serlo, y los autores que las
componen y los actores que las representan dicen que así han de ser, porque
así las quiere el vulgo, y no de otra manera; y que las que llevan traza y
siguen la fábula como el arte pide, no sirven sino para cuatro discretos
que las entienden, y todos los demás se quedan ayunos de entender su
artificio, y que a ellos les está mejor ganar de comer con los muchos, que
no opinión con los pocos, deste modo vendrá a ser un libro, al cabo de
haberme quemado las cejas por guardar los preceptos referidos, y vendré a
ser el sastre del cantillo''. Y, aunque algunas veces he procurado
persuadir a los actores que se engañan en tener la opinión que tienen, y
que más gente atraerán y más fama cobrarán representando comedias que hagan
el arte que no con las disparatadas, y están tan asidos y encorporados en
su parecer, que no hay razón ni evidencia que dél los saque. Acuérdome que
un día dije a uno destos pertinaces: ''Decidme, ¿no os acordáis que ha
pocos años que se representaron en España tres tragedias que compuso un
famoso poeta destos reinos, las cuales fueron tales, que admiraron,
alegraron y suspendieron a todos cuantos las oyeron, así simples como
prudentes, así del vulgo como de los escogidos, y dieron más dineros a los
representantes ellas tres solas que treinta de las mejores que después acá
se han hecho?'' ''Sin duda -respondió el autor que digo-, que debe de decir
vuestra merced por La Isabela, La Filis y La Alejandra''. ''Por ésas digo
-le repliqué yo-; y mirad si guardaban bien los preceptos del arte, y si
por guardarlos dejaron de parecer lo que eran y de agradar a todo el mundo.
Así que no está la falta en el vulgo, que pide disparates, sino en aquellos
que no saben representar otra cosa. Sí, que no fue disparate La ingratitud
vengada, ni le tuvo La Numancia, ni se le halló en la del Mercader amante,
ni menos en La enemiga favorable, ni en otras algunas que de algunos
entendidos poetas han sido compuestas, para fama y renombre suyo, y para
ganancia de los que las han representado''. Y otras cosas añadí a éstas,
con que, a mi parecer, le dejé algo confuso, pero no satisfecho ni
convencido para sacarle de su errado pensamiento.

-En materia ha tocado vuestra merced, señor canónigo -dijo a esta sazón el
cura-, que ha despertado en mí un antiguo rancor que tengo con las comedias
que agora se usan, tal, que iguala al que tengo con los libros de
caballerías; porque, habiendo de ser la comedia, según le parece a Tulio,
espejo de la vida humana, ejemplo de las costumbres y imagen de la verdad,
las que ahora se representan son espejos de disparates, ejemplos de
necedades e imágenes de lascivia. Porque, ¿qué mayor disparate puede ser en
el sujeto que tratamos que salir un niño en mantillas en la primera cena
del primer acto, y en la segunda salir ya hecho hombre barbado? Y ¿qué
mayor que pintarnos un viejo valiente y un mozo cobarde, un lacayo
rectórico, un paje consejero, un rey ganapán y una princesa fregona? ¿Qué
diré, pues, de la observancia que guardan en los tiempos en que pueden o
podían suceder las acciones que representan, sino que he visto comedia que
la primera jornada comenzó en Europa, la segunda en Asia, la tercera se
acabó en Africa, y ansí fuera de cuatro jornadas, la cuarta acababa en
América, y así se hubiera hecho en todas las cuatro partes del mundo? Y si
es que la imitación es lo principal que ha de tener la comedia, ¿cómo es
posible que satisfaga a ningún mediano entendimiento que, fingiendo una
acción que pasa en tiempo del rey Pepino y Carlomagno, el mismo que en ella
hace la persona principal le atribuyan que fue el emperador Heraclio, que
entró con la Cruz en Jerusalén, y el que ganó la Casa Santa, como Godofre
de Bullón, habiendo infinitos años de lo uno a lo otro; y fundándose la
comedia sobre cosa fingida, atribuirle verdades de historia, y mezclarle
pedazos de otras sucedidas a diferentes personas y tiempos, y esto, no con
trazas verisímiles, sino con patentes errores de todo punto inexcusables? Y
es lo malo que hay ignorantes que digan que esto es lo perfecto, y que lo
demás es buscar gullurías. Pues, ¿qué si venimos a las comedias divinas?:
¡qué de milagros falsos fingen en ellas, qué de cosas apócrifas y mal
entendidas, atribuyendo a un santo los milagros de otro! Y aun en las
humanas se atreven a hacer milagros, sin más respeto ni consideración que
parecerles que allí estará bien el tal milagro y apariencia, como ellos
llaman, para que gente ignorante se admire y venga a la comedia; que todo
esto es en perjuicio de la verdad y en menoscabo de las historias, y aun en
oprobrio de los ingenios españoles; porque los estranjeros, que con mucha
puntualidad guardan las leyes de la comedia, nos tienen por bárbaros e
ignorantes, viendo los absurdos y disparates de las que hacemos. Y no sería
bastante disculpa desto decir que el principal intento que las repúblicas
bien ordenadas tienen, permitiendo que se hagan públicas comedias, es para
entretener la comunidad con alguna honesta recreación, y divertirla a veces
de los malos humores que suele engendrar la ociosidad; y que, pues éste se
consigue con cualquier comedia, buena o mala, no hay para qué poner leyes,
ni estrechar a los que las componen y representan a que las hagan como
debían hacerse, pues, como he dicho, con cualquiera se consigue lo que con
ellas se pretende. A lo cual respondería yo que este fin se conseguiría
mucho mejor, sin comparación alguna, con las comedias buenas que con las no
tales; porque, de haber oído la comedia artificiosa y bien ordenada,
saldría el oyente alegre con las burlas, enseñado con las veras, admirado
de los sucesos, discreto con las razones, advertido con los embustes, sagaz
con los ejemplos, airado contra el vicio y enamorado de la virtud; que
todos estos afectos ha de despertar la buena comedia en el ánimo del que la
escuchare, por rústico y torpe que sea; y de toda imposibilidad es
imposible dejar de alegrar y entretener, satisfacer y contentar, la comedia
que todas estas partes tuviere mucho más que aquella que careciere dellas,
como por la mayor parte carecen estas que de ordinario agora se
representan. Y no tienen la culpa desto los poetas que las componen, porque
algunos hay dellos que conocen muy bien en lo que yerran, y saben
estremadamente lo que deben hacer; pero, como las comedias se han hecho
mercadería vendible, dicen, y dicen verdad, que los representantes no se
las comprarían si no fuesen de aquel jaez; y así, el poeta procura
acomodarse con lo que el representante que le ha de pagar su obra le pide.
Y que esto sea verdad véase por muchas e infinitas comedias que ha
compuesto un felicísimo ingenio destos reinos, con tanta gala, con tanto
donaire, con tan elegante verso, con tan buenas razones, con tan graves
sentencias y, finalmente, tan llenas de elocución y alteza de estilo, que
tiene lleno el mundo de su fama. Y, por querer acomodarse al gusto de los
representantes, no han llegado todas, como han llegado algunas, al punto de
la perfección que requieren. Otros las componen tan sin mirar lo que hacen,
que después de representadas tienen necesidad los recitantes de huirse y
ausentarse, temerosos de ser castigados, como lo han sido muchas veces, por
haber representado cosas en perjuicio de algunos reyes y en deshonra de
algunos linajes. Y todos estos inconvinientes cesarían, y aun otros muchos
más que no digo, con que hubiese en la Corte una persona inteligente y
discreta que examinase todas las comedias antes que se representasen (no
sólo aquellas que se hiciesen en la Corte, sino todas las que se quisiesen
representar en España), sin la cual aprobación, sello y firma, ninguna
justicia en su lugar dejase representar comedia alguna; y, desta manera,
los comediantes tendrían cuidado de enviar las comedias a la Corte, y con
seguridad podrían representallas, y aquellos que las componen mirarían con
más cuidado y estudio lo que hacían, temorosos de haber de pasar sus obras
por el riguroso examen de quien lo entiende; y desta manera se harían
buenas comedias y se conseguiría felicísimamente lo que en ellas se
pretende: así el entretenimiento del pueblo, como la opinión de los
ingenios de España, el interés y seguridad de los recitantes y el ahorro
del cuidado de castigallos. Y si diese cargo a otro, o a este mismo, que
examinase los libros de caballerías que de nuevo se compusiesen, sin duda
podrían salir algunos con la perfección que vuestra merced ha dicho,
enriqueciendo nuestra lengua del agradable y precioso tesoro de la
elocuencia, dando ocasión que los libros viejos se escureciesen a la luz de
los nuevos que saliesen, para honesto pasatiempo, no solamente de los
ociosos, sino de los más ocupados; pues no es posible que esté continuo el
arco armado, ni la condición y flaqueza humana se pueda sustentar sin
alguna lícita recreación.

A este punto de su coloquio llegaban el canónigo y el cura, cuando,
adelantándose el barbero, llegó a ellos, y dijo al cura:

-Aquí, señor licenciado, es el lugar que yo dije que era bueno para que,
sesteando nosotros, tuviesen los bueyes fresco y abundoso pasto.

-Así me lo parece a mí -respondió el cura.

Y, diciéndole al canónigo lo que pensaba hacer, él también quiso quedarse
con ellos, convidado del sitio de un hermoso valle que a la vista se les
ofrecía. Y, así por gozar dél como de la conversación del cura, de quien ya
iba aficionado, y por saber más por menudo las hazañas de don Quijote,
mandó a algunos de sus criados que se fuesen a la venta, que no lejos de
allí estaba, y trujesen della lo que hubiese de comer, para todos, porque
él determinaba de sestear en aquel lugar aquella tarde; a lo cual uno de
sus criados respondió que el acémila del repuesto, que ya debía de estar en
la venta, traía recado bastante para no obligar a no tomar de la venta más
que cebada.

-Pues así es -dijo el canónigo-, llévense allá todas las cabalgaduras, y
haced volver la acémila.

En tanto que esto pasaba, viendo Sancho que podía hablar a su amo sin la
continua asistencia del cura y el barbero, que tenía por sospechosos, se
llegó a la jaula donde iba su amo, y le dijo:

-Señor, para descargo de mi conciencia, le quiero decir lo que pasa cerca
de su encantamento; y es que aquestos dos que vienen aquí cubiertos los
rostros son el cura de nuestro lugar y el barbero; y imagino han dado esta
traza de llevalle desta manera, de pura envidia que tienen como vuestra
merced se les adelanta en hacer famosos hechos. Presupuesta, pues, esta
verdad, síguese que no va encantado, sino embaído y tonto. Para prueba de
lo cual le quiero preguntar una cosa; y si me responde como creo que me ha
de responder, tocará con la mano este engaño y verá como no va encantado,
sino trastornado el juicio.

-Pregunta lo que quisieres, hijo Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que yo te
satisfaré y responderé a toda tu voluntad. Y en lo que dices que aquellos
que allí van y vienen con nosotros son el cura y el barbero, nuestros
compatriotos y conocidos, bien podrá ser que parezca que son ellos mesmos;
pero que lo sean realmente y en efeto, eso no lo creas en ninguna manera.
Lo que has de creer y entender es que si ellos se les parecen, como dices,
debe de ser que los que me han encantado habrán tomado esa apariencia y
semejanza; porque es fácil a los encantadores tomar la figura que se les
antoja, y habrán tomado las destos nuestros amigos, para darte a ti ocasión
de que pienses lo que piensas, y ponerte en un laberinto de imaginaciones,
que no aciertes a salir dél, aunque tuvieses la soga de Teseo. Y también lo
habrán hecho para que yo vacile en mi entendimiento, y no sepa atinar de
dónde me viene este daño; porque si, por una parte, tú me dices que me
acompañan el barbero y el cura de nuestro pueblo, y, por otra, yo me veo
enjaulado, y sé de mí que fuerzas humanas, como no fueran sobrenaturales,
no fueran bastantes para enjaularme, ¿qué quieres que diga o piense sino
que la manera de mi encantamento excede a cuantas yo he leído en todas
las historias que tratan de caballeros andantes que han sido encantados?
Ansí que, bien puedes darte paz y sosiego en esto de creer que son los que
dices, porque así son ellos como yo soy turco. Y, en lo que toca a querer
preguntarme algo, di, que yo te responderé, aunque me preguntes de aquí a
mañana.

-¡Válame Nuestra Señora! -respondió Sancho, dando una gran voz-. Y ¿es
posible que sea vuestra merced tan duro de celebro, y tan falto de meollo,
que no eche de ver que es pura verdad la que le digo, y que en esta su
prisión y desgracia tiene más parte la malicia que el encanto? Pero, pues
así es, yo le quiero probar evidentemente como no va encantado. Si no,
dígame, así Dios le saque desta tormenta, y así se vea en los brazos de mi
señora Dulcinea cuando menos se piense...

-Acaba de conjurarme -dijo don Quijote-, y pregunta lo que quisieres; que
ya te he dicho que te responderé con toda puntualidad.

-Eso pido -replicó Sancho-; y lo que quiero saber es que me diga, sin
añadir ni quitar cosa ninguna, sino con toda verdad, como se espera que la
han de decir y la dicen todos aquellos que profesan las armas, como vuestra
merced las profesa, debajo de título de caballeros andantes...

-Digo que no mentiré en cosa alguna -respondió don Quijote-. Acaba ya de
preguntar, que en verdad que me cansas con tantas salvas, plegarias y
prevenciones, Sancho.

-Digo que yo estoy seguro de la bondad y verdad de mi amo; y así, porque
hace al caso a nuestro cuento, pregunto, hablando con acatamiento, si acaso
después que vuestra merced va enjaulado y, a su parecer, encantado en esta
jaula, le ha venido gana y voluntad de hacer aguas mayores o menores, como
suele decirse.

-No entiendo eso de hacer aguas, Sancho; aclárate más, si quieres que te
responda derechamente.

-¿Es posible que no entiende vuestra merced de hacer aguas menores o
mayores? Pues en la escuela destetan a los muchachos con ello. Pues sepa
que quiero decir si le ha venido gana de hacer lo que no se escusa.

-¡Ya, ya te entiendo, Sancho! Y muchas veces; y aun agora la tengo. ¡Sácame
deste peligro, que no anda todo limpio!





Capítulo XLIX. Donde se trata del discreto coloquio que Sancho Panza tuvo
con su señor don Quijote


-¡Ah -dijo Sancho-; cogido le tengo! Esto es lo que yo deseaba saber, como
al alma y como a la vida. Venga acá, señor: ¿podría negar lo que comúnmente
suele decirse por ahí cuando una persona está de mala voluntad: "No sé qué
tiene fulano, que ni come, ni bebe, ni duerme, ni responde a propósito a lo
que le preguntan, que no parece sino que está encantado"? De donde se viene
a sacar que los que no comen, ni beben, ni duermen, ni hacen las obras
naturales que yo digo, estos tales están encantados; pero no aquellos que
tienen la gana que vuestra merced tiene y que bebe cuando se lo dan, y come
cuando lo tiene, y responde a todo aquello que le preguntan.

-Verdad dices, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, pero ya te he dicho que hay
muchas maneras de encantamentos, y podría ser que con el tiempo se hubiesen
mudado de unos en otros, y que agora se use que los encantados hagan todo
lo que yo hago, aunque antes no lo hacían. De manera que contra el uso de
los tiempos no hay que argüir ni de qué hacer consecuencias. Yo sé y tengo
para mí que voy encantado, y esto me basta para la seguridad de mi
conciencia; que la formaría muy grande si yo pensase que no estaba
encantado y me dejase estar en esta jaula, perezoso y cobarde, defraudando
el socorro que podría dar a muchos menesterosos y necesitados que de mi
ayuda y amparo deben tener a la hora de ahora precisa y estrema necesidad.

-Pues, con todo eso -replicó Sancho-, digo que, para mayor abundancia y
satisfación, sería bien que vuestra merced probase a salir desta cárcel,
que yo me obligo con todo mi poder a facilitarlo, y aun a sacarle della, y
probase de nuevo a subir sobre su buen Rocinante, que también parece que va
encantado, según va de malencólico y triste; y, hecho esto, probásemos otra
vez la suerte de buscar más aventuras; y si no nos sucediese bien, tiempo
nos queda para volvernos a la jaula, en la cual prometo, a ley de buen y
leal escudero, de encerrarme juntamente con vuestra merced, si acaso fuere
vuestra merced tan desdichado, o yo tan simple, que no acierte a salir con
lo que digo.

-Yo soy contento de hacer lo que dices, Sancho hermano -replicó don
Quijote-; y cuando tú veas coyuntura de poner en obra mi libertad, yo te
obedeceré en todo y por todo; pero tú, Sancho, verás como te engañas en el
conocimiento de mi desgracia.

En estas pláticas se entretuvieron el caballero andante y el mal andante
escudero, hasta que llegaron donde, ya apeados, los aguardaban el cura, el
canónigo y el barbero. Desunció luego los bueyes de la carreta el boyero, y
dejólos andar a sus anchuras por aquel verde y apacible sitio, cuya
frescura convidaba a quererla gozar, no a las personas tan encantadas como
don Quijote, sino a los tan advertidos y discretos como su escudero; el
cual rogó al cura que permitiese que su señor saliese por un rato de la
jaula, porque si no le dejaban salir, no iría tan limpia aquella prisión
como requiría la decencia de un tal caballero como su amo. Entendióle el
cura, y dijo que de muy buena gana haría lo que le pedía si no temiera que,
en viéndose su señor en libertad, había de hacer de las suyas, y irse donde
jamás gentes le viesen.

-Yo le fío de la fuga -respondió Sancho.

-Y yo y todo -dijo el canónigo-; y más si él me da la palabra, como
caballero, de no apartarse de nosotros hasta que sea nuestra voluntad.

-Sí doy -respondió don Quijote, que todo lo estaba escuchando-; cuanto más,
que el que está encantado, como yo, no tiene libertad para hacer de su
persona lo que quisiere, porque el que le encantó le puede hacer que no se
mueva de un lugar en tres siglos; y si hubiere huido, le hará volver en
volandas. -Y que, pues esto era así, bien podían soltalle, y más, siendo
tan en provecho de todos; y del no soltalle les protestaba que no podía
dejar de fatigalles el olfato, si de allí no se desviaban.

Tomóle la mano el canónigo, aunque las tenía atadas, y, debajo de su buena
fe y palabra, le desenjaularon, de que él se alegró infinito y en grande
manera de verse fuera de la jaula. Y lo primero que hizo fue estirarse todo
el cuerpo, y luego se fue donde estaba Rocinante, y, dándole dos palmadas
en las ancas, dijo:

-Aún espero en Dios y en su bendita Madre, flor y espejo de los caballos,
que presto nos hemos de ver los dos cual deseamos; tú, con tu señor a
cuestas; y yo, encima de ti, ejercitando el oficio para que Dios me echó al
mundo.

Y, diciendo esto, don Quijote se apartó con Sancho en remota parte, de
donde vino más aliviado y con más deseos de poner en obra lo que su
escudero ordenase.

Mirábalo el canónigo, y admirábase de ver la estrañeza de su grande locura,
y de que, en cuanto hablaba y respondía, mostraba tener bonísimo
entendimiento: solamente venía a perder los estribos, como otras veces se
ha dicho, en tratándole de caballería. Y así, movido de compasión, después
de haberse sentado todos en la verde yerba, para esperar el repuesto del
canónigo, le dijo:

-¿Es posible, señor hidalgo, que haya podido tanto con vuestra merced la
amarga y ociosa letura de los libros de caballerías, que le hayan vuelto el
juicio de modo que venga a creer que va encantado, con otras cosas deste
jaez, tan lejos de ser verdaderas como lo está la mesma mentira de la
verdad? Y ¿cómo es posible que haya entendimiento humano que se dé a
entender que ha habido en el mundo aquella infinidad de Amadises, y aquella
turbamulta de tanto famoso caballero, tanto emperador de Trapisonda, tanto
Felixmarte de Hircania, tanto palafrén, tanta doncella andante, tantas
sierpes, tantos endriagos, tantos gigantes, tantas inauditas aventuras,
tanto género de encantamentos, tantas batallas, tantos desaforados
encuentros, tanta bizarría de trajes, tantas princesas enamoradas, tantos
escuderos condes, tantos enanos graciosos, tanto billete, tanto requiebro,
tantas mujeres valientes; y, finalmente, tantos y tan disparatados casos
como los libros de caballerías contienen? De mí sé decir que, cuando los
leo, en tanto que no pongo la imaginación en pensar que son todos mentira y
liviandad, me dan algún contento; pero, cuando caigo en la cuenta de lo que
son, doy con el mejor dellos en la pared, y aun diera con él en el fuego si
cerca o presente le tuviera, bien como a merecedores de tal pena, por ser
falsos y embusteros, y fuera del trato que pide la común naturaleza, y como
a inventores de nuevas sectas y de nuevo modo de vida, y como a quien da
ocasión que el vulgo ignorante venga a creer y a tener por verdaderas
tantas necedades como contienen. Y aun tienen tanto atrevimiento, que se
atreven a turbar los ingenios de los discretos y bien nacidos hidalgos,
como se echa bien de ver por lo que con vuestra merced han hecho, pues le
han traído a términos que sea forzoso encerrarle en una jaula, y traerle
sobre un carro de bueyes, como quien trae o lleva algún león o algún tigre,
de lugar en lugar, para ganar con él dejando que le vean. ¡Ea, señor don
Quijote, duélase de sí mismo, y redúzgase al gremio de la discreción, y
sepa usar de la mucha que el cielo fue servido de darle, empleando el
felicísimo talento de su ingenio en otra letura que redunde en
aprovechamiento de su conciencia y en aumento de su honra! Y si todavía,
llevado de su natural inclinación, quisiere leer libros de hazañas y de
caballerías, lea en la Sacra Escritura el de los Jueces; que allí hallará
verdades grandiosas y hechos tan verdaderos como valientes. Un Viriato tuvo
Lusitania; un César, Roma; un Anibal, Cartago; un Alejandro, Grecia; un
conde Fernán González, Castilla; un Cid, Valencia; un Gonzalo Fernández,
Andalucía; un Diego García de Paredes, Estremadura; un Garci Pérez de
Vargas, Jerez; un Garcilaso, Toledo; un don Manuel de León, Sevilla, cuya
leción de sus valerosos hechos puede entretener, enseñar, deleitar y
admirar a los más altos ingenios que los leyeren. Ésta sí será letura digna
del buen entendimiento de vuestra merced, señor don Quijote mío, de la cual
saldrá erudito en la historia, enamorado de la virtud, enseñado en la
bondad, mejorado en las costumbres, valiente sin temeridad, osado sin
cobardía, y todo esto, para honra de Dios, provecho suyo y fama de la
Mancha; do, según he sabido, trae vuestra merced su principio y origen.

Atentísimamente estuvo don Quijote escuchando las razones del canónigo; y,
cuando vio que ya había puesto fin a ellas, después de haberle estado un
buen espacio mirando, le dijo:

-Paréceme, señor hidalgo, que la plática de vuestra merced se ha encaminado
a querer darme a entender que no ha habido caballeros andantes en el mundo,
y que todos los libros de caballerías son falsos, mentirosos, dañadores e
inútiles para la república; y que yo he hecho mal en leerlos, y peor en
creerlos, y más mal en imitarlos, habiéndome puesto a seguir la durísima
profesión de la caballería andante, que ellos enseñan, negándome que no ha
habido en el mundo Amadises, ni de Gaula ni de Grecia, ni todos los otros
caballeros de que las escrituras están llenas.

-Todo es al pie de la letra como vuestra merced lo va relatando -dijo a
está sazón el canónigo.

A lo cual respondió don Quijote:

-Añadió también vuestra merced, diciendo que me habían hecho mucho daño
tales libros, pues me habían vuelto el juicio y puéstome en una jaula, y
que me sería mejor hacer la enmienda y mudar de letura, leyendo otros más
verdaderos y que mejor deleitan y enseñan.

-Así es -dijo el canónigo.

-Pues yo -replicó don Quijote- hallo por mi cuenta que el sin juicio y el
encantado es vuestra merced, pues se ha puesto a decir tantas blasfemias
contra una cosa tan recebida en el mundo, y tenida por tan verdadera, que
el que la negase, como vuestra merced la niega, merecía la mesma pena que
vuestra merced dice que da a los libros cuando los lee y le enfadan. Porque
querer dar a entender a nadie que Amadís no fue en el mundo, ni todos los
otros caballeros aventureros de que están colmadas las historias, será
querer persuadir que el sol no alumbra, ni el yelo enfría, ni la tierra
sustenta; porque, ¿qué ingenio puede haber en el mundo que pueda persuadir
a otro que no fue verdad lo de la infanta Floripes y Guy de Borgoña, y lo
de Fierabrás con la puente de Mantible, que sucedió en el tiempo de
Carlomagno; que voto a tal que es tanta verdad como es ahora de día? Y si
es mentira, también lo debe de ser que no hubo Héctor, ni Aquiles, ni la
guerra de Troya, ni los Doce Pares de Francia, ni el rey Artús de
Ingalaterra, que anda hasta ahora convertido en cuervo y le esperan en su
reino por momentos. Y también se atreverán a decir que es mentirosa la
historia de Guarino Mezquino, y la de la demanda del Santo Grial, y que son
apócrifos los amores de don Tristán y la reina Iseo, como los de Ginebra y
Lanzarote, habiendo personas que casi se acuerdan de haber visto a la dueña
Quintañona, que fue la mejor escanciadora de vino que tuvo la Gran Bretaña.
Y es esto tan ansí, que me acuerdo yo que me decía una mi agüela de partes
de mi padre, cuando veía alguna dueña con tocas reverendas: ''Aquélla,
nieto, se parece a la dueña Quintañona''; de donde arguyo yo que la debió
de conocer ella o, por lo menos, debió de alcanzar a ver algún retrato
suyo. Pues, ¿quién podrá negar no ser verdadera la historia de Pierres y la
linda Magalona, pues aun hasta hoy día se vee en la armería de los reyes la
clavija con que volvía al caballo de madera, sobre quien iba el valiente
Pierres por los aires, que es un poco mayor que un timón de carreta? Y
junto a la clavija está la silla de Babieca, y en Roncesvalles está el
cuerno de Roldán, tamaño como una grande viga: de donde se infiere que hubo
Doce Pares, que hubo Pierres, que hubo Cides, y otros caballeros
semejantes,

   déstos que dicen las gentes
   que a sus aventuras van.

Si no, díganme también que no es verdad que fue caballero andante el
valiente lusitano Juan de Merlo, que fue a Borgoña y se combatió en la
ciudad de Ras con el famoso señor de Charní, llamado mosén Pierres, y
después, en la ciudad de Basilea, con mosén Enrique de Remestán, saliendo
de entrambas empresas vencedor y lleno de honrosa fama; y las aventuras y
desafíos que también acabaron en Borgoña los valientes españoles Pedro
Barba y Gutierre Quijada (de cuya alcurnia yo deciendo por línea recta de
varón), venciendo a los hijos del conde de San Polo. Niéguenme, asimesmo,
que no fue a buscar las aventuras a Alemania don Fernando de Guevara, donde
se combatió con micer Jorge, caballero de la casa del duque de Austria;
digan que fueron burla las justas de Suero de Quiñones, del Paso; las
empresas de mosén Luis de Falces contra don Gonzalo de Guzmán, caballero
castellano, con otras muchas hazañas hechas por caballeros cristianos,
déstos y de los reinos estranjeros, tan auténticas y verdaderas, que torno
a decir que el que las negase carecería de toda razón y buen discurso.

Admirado quedó el canónigo de oír la mezcla que don Quijote hacía de
verdades y mentiras, y de ver la noticia que tenía de todas aquellas cosas
tocantes y concernientes a los hechos de su andante caballería; y así, le
respondió:

-No puedo yo negar, señor don Quijote, que no sea verdad algo de lo que
vuestra merced ha dicho, especialmente en lo que toca a los caballeros
andantes españoles; y, asimesmo, quiero conceder que hubo Doce Pares de
Francia, pero no quiero creer que hicieron todas aquellas cosas que el
arzobispo Turpín dellos escribe; porque la verdad dello es que fueron
caballeros escogidos por los reyes de Francia, a quien llamaron pares por
ser todos iguales en valor, en calidad y en valentía; a lo menos, si no lo
eran, era razón que lo fuesen y era como una religión de las que ahora se
usan de Santiago o de Calatrava, que se presupone que los que la profesan
han de ser, o deben ser, caballeros valerosos, valientes y bien nacidos; y,
como ahora dicen caballero de San Juan, o de Alcántara, decían en aquel
tiempo caballero de los Doce Pares, porque no fueron doce iguales los que
para esta religión militar se escogieron. En lo de que hubo Cid no hay
duda, ni menos Bernardo del Carpio, pero de que hicieron las hazañas que
dicen, creo que la hay muy grande. En lo otro de la clavija que vuestra
merced dice del conde Pierres, y que está junto a la silla de Babieca en la
armería de los reyes, confieso mi pecado; que soy tan ignorante, o tan
corto de vista, que, aunque he visto la silla, no he echado de ver la
clavija, y más siendo tan grande como vuestra merced ha dicho.

-Pues allí está, sin duda alguna -replicó don Quijote-; y, por más señas,
dicen que está metida en una funda de vaqueta, porque no se tome de moho.

-Todo puede ser -respondió el canónigo-; pero, por las órdenes que recebí,
que no me acuerdo haberla visto. Mas, puesto que conceda que está allí, no
por eso me obligo a creer las historias de tantos Amadises, ni las de tanta
turbamulta de caballeros como por ahí nos cuentan; ni es razón que un
hombre como vuestra merced, tan honrado y de tan buenas partes, y dotado de
tan buen entendimiento, se dé a entender que son verdaderas tantas y tan
estrañas locuras como las que están escritas en los disparatados libros de
caballerías.





Capítulo L. De las discretas altercaciones que don Quijote y el canónigo
tuvieron, con otros sucesos


-¡Bueno está eso! -respondió don Quijote-. Los libros que están impresos
con licencia de los reyes y con aprobación de aquellos a quien se
remitieron, y que con gusto general son leídos y celebrados de los grandes
y de los chicos, de los pobres y de los ricos, de los letrados e
ignorantes, de los plebeyos y caballeros, finalmente, de todo género de
personas, de cualquier estado y condición que sean, ¿habían de ser
mentira?; y más llevando tanta apariencia de verdad, pues nos cuentan el
padre, la madre, la patria, los parientes, la edad, el lugar y las hazañas,
punto por punto y día por día, que el tal caballero hizo, o caballeros
hicieron. Calle vuestra merced, no diga tal blasfemia (y créame que le
aconsejo en esto lo que debe de hacer como discreto), sino léalos, y verá
el gusto que recibe de su leyenda. Si no, dígame: ¿hay mayor contento que
ver, como si dijésemos: aquí ahora se muestra delante de nosotros un gran
lago de pez hirviendo a borbollones, y que andan nadando y cruzando por él
muchas serpientes, culebras y lagartos, y otros muchos géneros de animales
feroces y espantables, y que del medio del lago sale una voz tristísima que
dice: ''Tú, caballero, quienquiera que seas, que el temeroso lago estás
mirando, si quieres alcanzar el bien que debajo destas negras aguas se
encubre, muestra el valor de tu fuerte pecho y arrójate en mitad de su
negro y encendido licor; porque si así no lo haces, no serás digno de ver
las altas maravillas que en sí encierran y contienen los siete castillos de
las siete fadas que debajo desta negregura yacen?'' ¿Y que, apenas el
caballero no ha acabado de oír la voz temerosa, cuando, sin entrar más en
cuentas consigo, sin ponerse a considerar el peligro a que se pone, y aun
sin despojarse de la pesadumbre de sus fuertes armas, encomendándose a Dios
y a su señora, se arroja en mitad del bullente lago, y, cuando no se cata
ni sabe dónde ha de parar, se halla entre unos floridos campos, con quien
los Elíseos no tienen que ver en ninguna cosa? Allí le parece que el cielo
es más transparente, y que el sol luce con claridad más nueva; ofrécesele a
los ojos una apacible floresta de tan verdes y frondosos árboles compuesta,
que alegra a la vista su verdura, y entretiene los oídos el dulce y no
aprendido canto de los pequeños, infinitos y pintados pajarillos que por
los intricados ramos van cruzando. Aquí descubre un arroyuelo, cuyas
frescas aguas, que líquidos cristales parecen, corren sobre menudas arenas
y blancas pedrezuelas, que oro cernido y puras perlas semejan; acullá vee
una artificiosa fuente de jaspe variado y de liso mármol compuesta; acá vee
otra a lo brutesco adornada, adonde las menudas conchas de las almejas, con
las torcidas casas blancas y amarillas del caracol, puestas con orden
desordenada, mezclados entre ellas pedazos de cristal luciente y de
contrahechas esmeraldas, hacen una variada labor, de manera que el arte,
imitando a la naturaleza, parece que allí la vence. Acullá de improviso se
le descubre un fuerte castillo o vistoso alcázar, cuyas murallas son de
macizo oro, las almenas de diamantes, las puertas de jacintos; finalmente,
él es de tan admirable compostura que, con ser la materia de que está
formado no menos que de diamantes, de carbuncos, de rubíes, de perlas, de
oro y de esmeraldas, es de más estimación su hechura. Y ¿hay más que ver,
después de haber visto esto, que ver salir por la puerta del castillo un
buen número de doncellas, cuyos galanos y vistosos trajes, si yo me pusiese
ahora a decirlos como las historias nos los cuentan, sería nunca acabar; y
tomar luego la que parecía principal de todas por la mano al atrevido
caballero que se arrojó en el ferviente lago, y llevarle, sin hablarle
palabra, dentro del rico alcázar o castillo, y hacerle desnudar como su
madre le parió, y bañarle con templadas aguas, y luego untarle todo con
olorosos ungüentos, y vestirle una camisa de cendal delgadísimo, toda
olorosa y perfumada, y acudir otra doncella y echarle un mantón sobre los
hombros, que, por lo menos menos, dicen que suele valer una ciudad, y aun
más? ¿Qué es ver, pues, cuando nos cuentan que, tras todo esto, le llevan a
otra sala, donde halla puestas las mesas, con tanto concierto, que queda
suspenso y admirado?; ¿qué, el verle echar agua a manos, toda de ámbar y de
olorosas flores distilada?; ¿qué, el hacerle sentar sobre una silla de
marfil?; ¿qué, verle servir todas las doncellas, guardando un maravilloso
silencio?; ¿qué, el traerle tanta diferencia de manjares, tan sabrosamente
guisados, que no sabe el apetito a cuál deba de alargar la mano? ¿Cuál será
oír la música que en tanto que come suena, sin saberse quién la canta ni
adónde suena? ¿Y, después de la comida acabada y las mesas alzadas,
quedarse el caballero recostado sobre la silla, y quizá mondándose los
dientes, como es costumbre, entrar a deshora por la puerta de la sala otra
mucho más hermosa doncella que ninguna de las primeras, y sentarse al lado
del caballero, y comenzar a darle cuenta de qué castillo es aquél, y de
cómo ella está encantada en él, con otras cosas que suspenden al caballero
y admiran a los leyentes que van leyendo su historia? No quiero alargarme
más en esto, pues dello se puede colegir que cualquiera parte que se lea,
de cualquiera historia de caballero andante, ha de causar gusto y maravilla
a cualquiera que la leyere. Y vuestra merced créame, y, como otra vez le he
dicho, lea estos libros, y verá cómo le destierran la melancolía que
tuviere, y le mejoran la condición, si acaso la tiene mala. De mí sé decir
que, después que soy caballero andante, soy valiente, comedido, liberal,
bien criado, generoso, cortés, atrevido, blando, paciente, sufridor de
trabajos, de prisiones, de encantos; y, aunque ha tan poco que me vi
encerrado en una jaula, como loco, pienso, por el valor de mi brazo,
favoreciéndome el cielo y no me siendo contraria la fortuna, en pocos días
verme rey de algún reino, adonde pueda mostrar el agradecimiento y
liberalidad que mi pecho encierra. Que, mía fe, señor, el pobre está
inhabilitado de poder mostrar la virtud de liberalidad con ninguno, aunque
en sumo grado la posea; y el agradecimiento que sólo consiste en el deseo
es cosa muerta, como es muerta la fe sin obras. Por esto querría que la
fortuna me ofreciese presto alguna ocasión donde me hiciese emperador, por
mostrar mi pecho haciendo bien a mis amigos, especialmente a este pobre de
Sancho Panza, mi escudero, que es el mejor hombre del mundo, y querría
darle un condado que le tengo muchos días ha prometido, sino que temo que
no ha de tener habilidad para gobernar su estado.

Casi estas últimas palabras oyó Sancho a su amo, a quien dijo:

-Trabaje vuestra merced, señor don Quijote, en darme ese condado, tan
prometido de vuestra merced como de mí esperado, que yo le prometo que no
me falte a mí habilidad para gobernarle; y, cuando me faltare, yo he oído
decir que hay hombres en el mundo que toman en arrendamiento los estados de
los señores, y les dan un tanto cada año, y ellos se tienen cuidado del
gobierno, y el señor se está a pierna tendida, gozando de la renta que le
dan, sin curarse de otra cosa;

y así haré yo, y no repararé en tanto más cuanto, sino que luego me
desistiré de todo, y me gozaré mi renta como un duque, y allá se lo hayan.

-Eso, hermano Sancho -dijo el canónigo-, entiéndese en cuanto al gozar la
renta; empero, al administrar justicia, ha de atender el señor del estado,
y aquí entra la habilidad y buen juicio, y principalmente la buena
intención de acertar; que si ésta falta en los principios, siempre irán
errados los medios y los fines; y así suele Dios ayudar al buen deseo del
simple como desfavorecer al malo del discreto.

-No sé esas filosofías -respondió Sancho Panza-; mas sólo sé que tan presto
tuviese yo el condado como sabría regirle; que tanta alma tengo yo como
otro, y tanto cuerpo como el que más, y tan rey sería yo de mi estado como
cada uno del suyo; y, siéndolo, haría lo que quisiese; y, haciendo lo que
quisiese, haría mi gusto; y, haciendo mi gusto, estaría contento; y, en
estando uno contento, no tiene más que desear; y, no teniendo más que
desear, acabóse; y el estado venga, y a Dios y veámonos, como dijo un ciego
a otro.

-No son malas filosofías ésas, como tú dices, Sancho; pero, con todo eso,
hay mucho que decir sobre esta materia de condados.

A lo cual replicó don Quijote:

-Yo no sé que haya más que decir; sólo me guío por el ejemplo que me da el
grande Amadís de Gaula, que hizo a su escudero conde de la Ínsula Firme; y
así, puedo yo, sin escrúpulo de conciencia, hacer conde a Sancho Panza, que
es uno de los mejores escuderos que caballero andante ha tenido.

Admirado quedó el canónigo de los concertados disparates que don Quijote
había dicho, del modo con que había pintado la aventura del Caballero del
Lago, de la impresión que en él habían hecho las pensadas mentiras de los
libros que había leído; y, finalmente, le admiraba la necedad de Sancho,
que con tanto ahínco deseaba alcanzar el condado que su amo le había
prometido.

Ya en esto, volvían los criados del canónigo, que a la venta habían ido por
la acémila del repuesto, y, haciendo mesa de una alhombra y de la verde
yerba del prado, a la sombra de unos árboles se sentaron, y comieron allí,
porque el boyero no perdiese la comodidad de aquel sitio, como queda dicho.
Y, estando comiendo, a deshora oyeron un recio estruendo y un son de
esquila, que por entre unas zarzas y espesas matas que allí junto estaban
sonaba, y al mesmo instante vieron salir de entre aquellas malezas una
hermosa cabra, toda la piel manchada de negro, blanco y pardo. Tras ella
venía un cabrero dándole voces, y diciéndole palabras a su uso, para que se
detuviese, o al rebaño volviese. La fugitiva cabra, temerosa y despavorida,
se vino a la gente, como a favorecerse della, y allí se detuvo. Llegó el
cabrero, y, asiéndola de los cuernos, como si fuera capaz de discurso y
entendimiento, le dijo:

-¡Ah cerrera, cerrera, Manchada, Manchada, y cómo andáis vos estos días de
pie cojo! ¿Qué lobos os espantan, hija? ¿No me diréis qué es esto, hermosa?
Mas ¡qué puede ser sino que sois hembra, y no podéis estar sosegada; que
mal haya vuestra condición, y la de todas aquellas a quien imitáis! Volved,
volved, amiga; que si no tan contenta, a lo menos, estaréis más segura en
vuestro aprisco, o con vuestras compañeras; que si vos que las habéis de
guardar y encaminar andáis tan sin guía y tan descaminada, ¿en qué podrán
parar ellas?

Contento dieron las palabras del cabrero a los que las oyeron,
especialmente al canónigo, que le dijo:

-Por vida vuestra, hermano, que os soseguéis un poco y no os acuciéis en
volver tan presto esa cabra a su rebaño; que, pues ella es hembra, como vos
decís, ha de seguir su natural distinto, por más que vos os pongáis a
estorbarlo. Tomad este bocado y bebed una vez, con que templaréis la
cólera, y en tanto, descansará la cabra.

Y el decir esto y el darle con la punta del cuchillo los lomos de un conejo
fiambre, todo fue uno. Tomólo y agradeciólo el cabrero; bebió y sosegóse, y
luego dijo:

-No querría que por haber yo hablado con esta alimaña tan en seso, me
tuviesen vuestras mercedes por hombre simple; que en verdad que no carecen
de misterio las palabras que le dije. Rústico soy, pero no tanto que no
entienda cómo se ha de tratar con los hombres y con las bestias.

-Eso creo yo muy bien -dijo el cura-, que ya yo sé de esperiencia que los
montes crían letrados y las cabañas de los pastores encierran filósofos.

-A lo menos, señor -replicó el cabrero-, acogen hombres escarmentados; y
para que creáis esta verdad y la toquéis con la mano, aunque parezca que
sin ser rogado me convido, si no os enfadáis dello y queréis, señores, un
breve espacio prestarme oído atento, os contaré una verdad que acredite lo
que ese señor (señalando al cura) ha dicho, y la mía.

A esto respondió don Quijote:

-Por ver que tiene este caso un no sé qué de sombra de aventura de
caballería, yo, por mi parte, os oiré, hermano, de muy buena gana, y así lo
harán todos estos señores, por lo mucho que tienen de discretos y de ser
amigos de curiosas novedades que suspendan, alegren y entretengan los
sentidos, como, sin duda, pienso que lo ha de hacer vuestro cuento.
Comenzad, pues, amigo, que todos escucharemos.

-Saco la mía -dijo Sancho-; que yo a aquel arroyo me voy con esta empanada,
donde pienso hartarme por tres días; porque he oído decir a mi señor don
Quijote que el escudero de caballero andante ha de comer, cuando se le
ofreciere, hasta no poder más, a causa que se les suele ofrecer entrar
acaso por una selva tan intricada que no aciertan a salir della en seis
días; y si el hombre no va harto, o bien proveídas las alforjas, allí se
podrá quedar, como muchas veces se queda, hecho carne momia.

-Tú estás en lo cierto, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-: vete adonde quisieres, y
come lo que pudieres; que yo ya estoy satisfecho, y sólo me falta dar al
alma su refacción, como se la daré escuchando el cuento deste buen hombre.

-Así las daremos todos a las nuestras -dijo el canónigo.

Y luego, rogó al cabrero que diese principio a lo que prometido había. El
cabrero dio dos palmadas sobre el lomo a la cabra, que por los cuernos
tenía, diciéndole:

-Recuéstate junto a mí, Manchada, que tiempo nos queda para volver a
nuestro apero.

Parece que lo entendió la cabra, porque, en sentándose su dueño, se tendió
ella junto a él con mucho sosiego, y, mirándole al rostro, daba a entender
que estaba atenta a lo que el cabrero iba diciendo, el cual comenzó su
historia desta manera:





Capítulo LI. Que trata de lo que contó el cabrero a todos los que llevaban
a don Quijote


-«Tres leguas deste valle está una aldea que, aunque pequeña, es de las más
ricas que hay en todos estos contornos; en la cual había un labrador muy
honrado, y tanto, que, aunque es anexo al ser rico el ser honrado, más lo
era él por la virtud que tenía que por la riqueza que alcanzaba. Mas lo que
le hacía más dichoso, según él decía, era tener una hija de tan estremada
hermosura, rara discreción, donaire y virtud, que el que la conocía y la
miraba se admiraba de ver las estremadas partes con que el cielo y la
naturaleza la habían enriquecido. Siendo niña fue hermosa, y siempre fue
creciendo en belleza, y en la edad de diez y seis años fue hermosísima. La
fama de su belleza se comenzó a estender por todas las circunvecinas
aldeas, ¿qué digo yo por las circunvecinas no más, si se estendió a las
apartadas ciudades, y aun se entró por las salas de los reyes, y por los
oídos de todo género de gente; que, como a cosa rara, o como a imagen de
milagros, de todas partes a verla venían? Guardábala su padre, y guardábase
ella; que no hay candados, guardas ni cerraduras que mejor guarden a una
doncella que las del recato proprio.

»La riqueza del padre y la belleza de la hija movieron a muchos, así del
pueblo como forasteros, a que por mujer se la pidiesen; mas él, como a
quien tocaba disponer de tan rica joya, andaba confuso, sin saber
determinarse a quién la entregaría de los infinitos que le importunaban. Y,
entre los muchos que tan buen deseo tenían, fui yo uno, a quien dieron
muchas y grandes esperanzas de buen suceso conocer que el padre conocía
quien yo era, el ser natural del mismo pueblo, limpio en sangre, en la edad
floreciente, en la hacienda muy rico y en el ingenio no menos acabado. Con
todas estas mismas partes la pidió también otro del mismo pueblo, que fue
causa de suspender y poner en balanza la voluntad del padre, a quien
parecía que con cualquiera de nosotros estaba su hija bien empleada; y, por
salir desta confusión, determinó decírselo a Leandra, que así se llama la
rica que en miseria me tiene puesto, advirtiendo que, pues los dos éramos
iguales, era bien dejar a la voluntad de su querida hija el escoger a su
gusto: cosa digna de imitar de todos los padres que a sus hijos quieren
poner en estado: no digo yo que los dejen escoger en cosas ruines y malas,
sino que se las propongan buenas, y de las buenas, que escojan a su gusto.
No sé yo el que tuvo Leandra; sólo sé que el padre nos entretuvo a
entrambos con la poca edad de su hija y con palabras generales, que ni le
obligaban, ni nos desobligaba tampoco. Llámase mi competidor Anselmo, y yo
Eugenio, porque vais con noticia de los nombres de las personas que en esta
tragedia se contienen, cuyo fin aún está pendiente; pero bien se deja
entender que será desastrado.

»En esta sazón, vino a nuestro pueblo un Vicente de la Rosa, hijo de un
pobre labrador del mismo lugar; el cual Vicente venía de las Italias, y de
otras diversas partes, de ser soldado. Llevóle de nuestro lugar, siendo
muchacho de hasta doce años, un capitán que con su compañía por allí acertó
a pasar, y volvió el mozo de allí a otros doce, vestido a la soldadesca,
pintado con mil colores, lleno de mil dijes de cristal y sutiles cadenas de
acero. Hoy se ponía una gala y mañana otra; pero todas sutiles, pintadas,
de poco peso y menos tomo. La gente labradora, que de suyo es maliciosa, y
dándole el ocio lugar es la misma malicia, lo notó, y contó punto por punto
sus galas y preseas, y halló que los vestidos eran tres, de diferentes
colores, con sus ligas y medias; pero él hacía tantos guisados e
invenciones dellas, que si no se los contaran, hubiera quien jurara que
había hecho muestra de más de diez pares de vestidos y de más de veinte
plumajes. Y no parezca impertinencia y demasía esto que de los vestidos voy
contando, porque ellos hacen una buena parte en esta historia.

»Sentábase en un poyo que debajo de un gran álamo está en nuestra plaza, y
allí nos tenía a todos la boca abierta, pendientes de las hazañas que nos
iba contando. No había tierra en todo el orbe que no hubiese visto, ni
batalla donde no se hubiese hallado; había muerto más moros que tiene
Marruecos y Túnez, y entrado en más singulares desafíos, según él decía,
que Gante y Luna, Diego García de Paredes y otros mil que nombraba; y de
todos había salido con vitoria, sin que le hubiesen derramado una sola gota
de sangre. Por otra parte, mostraba señales de heridas que, aunque no se
divisaban, nos hacía entender que eran arcabuzazos dados en diferentes
rencuentros y faciones. Finalmente, con una no vista arrogancia, llamaba de
vos a sus iguales y a los mismos que le conocían, y decía que su padre era
su brazo, su linaje, sus obras, y que debajo de ser soldado, al mismo rey
no debía nada. Añadiósele a estas arrogancias ser un poco músico y tocar
una guitarra a lo rasgado, de manera que decían algunos que la hacía
hablar; pero no pararon aquí sus gracias, que también la tenía de poeta, y
así, de cada niñería que pasaba en el pueblo, componía un romance de legua
y media de escritura.

»Este soldado, pues, que aquí he pintado, este Vicente de la Rosa, este
bravo, este galán, este músico, este poeta fue visto y mirado muchas veces
de Leandra, desde una ventana de su casa que tenía la vista a la plaza.
Enamoróla el oropel de sus vistosos trajes, encantáronla sus romances, que
de cada uno que componía daba veinte traslados, llegaron a sus oídos las
hazañas que él de sí mismo había referido, y, finalmente, que así el diablo
lo debía de tener ordenado, ella se vino a enamorar dél, antes que en él
naciese presunción de solicitalla. Y, como en los casos de amor no hay
ninguno que con más facilidad se cumpla que aquel que tiene de su parte el
deseo de la dama, con facilidad se concertaron Leandra y Vicente; y,
primero que alguno de sus muchos pretendientes cayesen en la cuenta de su
deseo, ya ella le tenía cumplido, habiendo dejado la casa de su querido y
amado padre, que madre no la tiene, y ausentádose de la aldea con el
soldado, que salió con más triunfo desta empresa que de todas las muchas
que él se aplicaba.

»Admiró el suceso a toda el aldea, y aun a todos los que dél noticia
tuvieron; yo quedé suspenso, Anselmo, atónito, el padre triste, sus
parientes afrentados, solícita la justicia, los cuadrilleros listos;
tomáronse los caminos, escudriñáronse los bosques y cuanto había, y, al
cabo de tres días, hallaron a la antojadiza Leandra en una cueva de un
monte, desnuda en camisa, sin muchos dineros y preciosísimas joyas que de
su casa había sacado. Volviéronla a la presencia del lastimado padre;
preguntáronle su desgracia; confesó sin apremio que Vicente de la Roca la
había engañado, y debajo de su palabra de ser su esposo la persuadió que
dejase la casa de su padre; que él la llevaría a la más rica y más viciosa
ciudad que había en todo el universo mundo, que era Nápoles; y que ella,
mal advertida y peor engañada, le había creído; y, robando a su padre, se
le entregó la misma noche que había faltado; y que él la llevó a un áspero
monte, y la encerró en aquella cueva donde la habían hallado. Contó también
como el soldado, sin quitalle su honor, le robó cuanto tenía, y la dejó en
aquella cueva y se fue: suceso que de nuevo puso en admiración a todos.

»Duro se nos hizo de creer la continencia del mozo, pero ella lo afirmó con
tantas veras, que fueron parte para que el desconsolado padre se consolase,
no haciendo cuenta de las riquezas que le llevaban, pues le habían dejado a
su hija con la joya que, si una vez se pierde, no deja esperanza de que
jamás se cobre. El mismo día que pareció Leandra la despareció su padre de
nuestros ojos, y la llevó a encerrar en un monesterio de una villa que está
aquí cerca, esperando que el tiempo gaste alguna parte de la mala opinión
en que su hija se puso. Los pocos años de Leandra sirvieron de disculpa de
su culpa, a lo menos con aquellos que no les iba algún interés en que ella
fuese mala o buena; pero los que conocían su discreción y mucho
entendimiento no atribuyeron a ignorancia su pecado, sino a su desenvoltura
y a la natural inclinación de las mujeres, que, por la mayor parte, suele
ser desatinada y mal compuesta.

»Encerrada Leandra, quedaron los ojos de Anselmo ciegos, a lo menos sin
tener cosa que mirar que contento le diese; los míos en tinieblas, sin luz
que a ninguna cosa de gusto les encaminase; con la ausencia de Leandra,
crecía nuestra tristeza, apocábase nuestra paciencia, maldecíamos las galas
del soldado y abominábamos del poco recato del padre de Leandra.
Finalmente, Anselmo y yo nos concertamos de dejar el aldea y venirnos a
este valle, donde él, apacentando una gran cantidad de ovejas suyas
proprias, y yo un numeroso rebaño de cabras, también mías, pasamos la vida
entre los árboles, dando vado a nuestras pasiones, o cantando juntos
alabanzas o vituperios de la hermosa Leandra, o suspirando solos y a solas
comunicando con el cielo nuestras querellas.

»A imitación nuestra, otros muchos de los pretendientes de Leandra se han
venido a estos ásperos montes, usando el mismo ejercicio nuestro; y son
tantos, que parece que este sitio se ha convertido en la pastoral Arcadia,
según está colmo de pastores y de apriscos, y no hay parte en él donde no
se oiga el nombre de la hermosa Leandra. Éste la maldice y la llama
antojadiza, varia y deshonesta; aquél la condena por fácil y ligera; tal la
absuelve y perdona, y tal la justicia y vitupera; uno celebra su hermosura,
otro reniega de su condición, y, en fin, todos la deshonran, y todos la
adoran, y de todos se estiende a tanto la locura, que hay quien se queje de
desdén sin haberla jamás hablado, y aun quien se lamente y sienta la
rabiosa enfermedad de los celos, que ella jamás dio a nadie; porque, como
ya tengo dicho, antes se supo su pecado que su deseo. No hay hueco de peña,
ni margen de arroyo, ni sombra de árbol que no esté ocupada de algún pastor
que sus desventuras a los aires cuente; el eco repite el nombre de Leandra
dondequiera que pueda formarse: Leandra resuenan los montes, Leandra
murmuran los arroyos, y Leandra nos tiene a todos suspensos y encantados,
esperando sin esperanza y temiendo sin saber de qué tememos. Entre estos
disparatados, el que muestra que menos y más juicio tiene es mi competidor
Anselmo, el cual, teniendo tantas otras cosas de que quejarse, sólo se
queja de ausencia; y al son de un rabel, que admirablemente toca, con
versos donde muestra su buen entendimiento, cantando se queja. Yo sigo otro
camino más fácil, y a mi parecer el más acertado, que es decir mal de la
ligereza de las mujeres, de su inconstancia, de su doble trato, de sus
promesas muertas, de su fe rompida, y, finalmente, del poco discurso que
tienen en saber colocar sus pensamientos e intenciones que tienen.» Y ésta
fue la ocasión, señores, de las palabras y razones que dije a esta cabra
cuando aquí llegué; que por ser hembra la tengo en poco, aunque es la mejor
de todo mi apero. Ésta es la historia que prometí contaros; si he sido en
el contarla prolijo, no seré en serviros corto: cerca de aquí tengo mi
majada, y en ella tengo fresca leche y muy sabrosísimo queso, con otras
varias y sazonadas frutas, no menos a la vista que al gusto agradables.





Capítulo LII. De la pendencia que don Quijote tuvo con el cabrero, con la
rara aventura de los deceplinantes, a quien dio felice fin a costa de su
sudor


General gusto causó el cuento del cabrero a todos los que escuchado le
habían; especialmente le recibió el canónigo, que con estraña curiosidad
notó la manera con que le había contado, tan lejos de parecer rústico
cabrero cuan cerca de mostrarse discreto cortesano; y así, dijo que había
dicho muy bien el cura en decir que los montes criaban letrados. Todos se
ofrecieron a Eugenio; pero el que más se mostró liberal en esto fue don
Quijote, que le dijo:

-Por cierto, hermano cabrero, que si yo me hallara posibilitado de poder
comenzar alguna aventura, que luego luego me pusiera en camino porque vos
la tuviérades buena; que yo sacara del monesterio, donde, sin duda alguna,
debe de estar contra su voluntad, a Leandra, a pesar de la abadesa y de
cuantos quisieran estorbarlo, y os la pusiera en vuestras manos, para que
hiciérades della a toda vuestra voluntad y talante, guardando, pero, las
leyes de la caballería, que mandan que a ninguna doncella se le sea fecho
desaguisado alguno; aunque yo espero en Dios Nuestro Señor que no ha de
poder tanto la fuerza de un encantador malicioso, que no pueda más la de
otro encantador mejor intencionado, y para entonces os prometo mi favor y
ayuda, como me obliga mi profesión, que no es otra si no es favorecer a los
desvalidos y menesterosos.

Miróle el cabrero, y, como vio a don Quijote de tan mal pelaje y catadura,
admiróse y preguntó al barbero, que cerca de sí tenía:

-Señor, ¿quién es este hombre, que tal talle tiene y de tal manera habla?

-¿Quién ha de ser -respondió el barbero- sino el famoso don Quijote de la
Mancha, desfacedor de agravios, enderezador de tuertos, el amparo de las
doncellas, el asombro de los gigantes y el vencedor de las batallas?

-Eso me semeja -respondió el cabrero- a lo que se lee en los libros de
caballeros andantes, que hacían todo eso que de este hombre vuestra merced
dice; puesto que para mí tengo, o que vuestra merced se burla, o que este
gentil hombre debe de tener vacíos los aposentos de la cabeza.

-Sois un grandísimo bellaco -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-; y vos sois el
vacío y el menguado, que yo estoy más lleno que jamás lo estuvo la muy
hideputa puta que os parió.

Y, diciendo y haciendo, arrebató de un pan que junto a sí tenía, y dio con
él al cabrero en todo el rostro, con tanta furia, que le remachó las
narices; mas el cabrero, que no sabía de burlas, viendo con cuántas veras
le maltrataban, sin tener respeto a la alhombra, ni a los manteles, ni a
todos aquellos que comiendo estaban, saltó sobre don Quijote, y, asiéndole
del cuello con entrambas manos, no dudara de ahogalle, si Sancho Panza no
llegara en aquel punto, y le asiera por las espaldas y diera con él encima
de la mesa, quebrando platos, rompiendo tazas y derramando y esparciendo
cuanto en ella estaba. Don Quijote, que se vio libre, acudió a subirse
sobre el cabrero; el cual, lleno de sangre el rostro, molido a coces de
Sancho, andaba buscando a gatas algún cuchillo de la mesa para hacer alguna
sanguinolenta venganza, pero estorbábanselo el canónigo y el cura; mas el
barbero hizo de suerte que el cabrero cogió debajo de sí a don Quijote,
sobre el cual llovió tanto número de mojicones, que del rostro del pobre
caballero llovía tanta sangre como del suyo.

Reventaban de risa el canónigo y el cura, saltaban los cuadrilleros de
gozo, zuzaban los unos y los otros, como hacen a los perros cuando en
pendencia están trabados; sólo Sancho Panza se desesperaba, porque no se
podía desasir de un criado del canónigo, que le estorbaba que a su amo no
ayudase.

En resolución, estando todos en regocijo y fiesta, sino los dos aporreantes
que se carpían, oyeron el son de una trompeta, tan triste que les hizo
volver los rostros hacia donde les pareció que sonaba; pero el que más se
alborotó de oírle fue don Quijote, el cual, aunque estaba debajo del
cabrero, harto contra su voluntad y más que medianamente molido, le dijo:

-Hermano demonio, que no es posible que dejes de serlo, pues has tenido
valor y fuerzas para sujetar las mías, ruégote que hagamos treguas, no más
de por una hora; porque el doloroso son de aquella trompeta que a nuestros
oídos llega me parece que a alguna nueva aventura me llama.

El cabrero, que ya estaba cansado de moler y ser molido, le dejó luego, y
don Quijote se puso en pie, volviendo asimismo el rostro adonde el son se
oía, y vio a deshora que por un recuesto bajaban muchos hombres vestidos de
blanco, a modo de diciplinantes.

Era el caso que aquel año habían las nubes negado su rocío a la tierra, y
por todos los lugares de aquella comarca se hacían procesiones, rogativas y
diciplinas, pidiendo a Dios abriese las manos de su misericordia y les
lloviese; y para este efecto la gente de una aldea que allí junto estaba
venía en procesión a una devota ermita que en un recuesto de aquel valle
había.

Don Quijote, que vio los estraños trajes de los diciplinantes, sin pasarle
por la memoria las muchas veces que los había de haber visto, se imaginó
que era cosa de aventura, y que a él solo tocaba, como a caballero andante,
el acometerla; y confirmóle más esta imaginación pensar que una imagen que
traían cubierta de luto fuese alguna principal señora que llevaban por
fuerza aquellos follones y descomedidos malandrines; y, como esto le cayó
en las mientes, con gran ligereza arremetió a Rocinante, que paciendo
andaba, quitándole del arzón el freno y el adarga, y en un punto le
enfrenó, y, pidiendo a Sancho su espada, subió sobre Rocinante y embrazó su
adarga, y dijo en alta voz a todos los que presentes estaban:

-Agora, valerosa compañía, veredes cuánto importa que haya en el mundo
caballeros que profesen la orden de la andante caballería; agora digo que
veredes, en la libertad de aquella buena señora que allí va cautiva, si se
han de estimar los caballeros andantes.

Y, en diciendo esto, apretó los muslos a Rocinante, porque espuelas no las
tenía, y, a todo galope, porque carrera tirada no se lee en toda esta
verdadera historia que jamás la diese Rocinante, se fue a encontrar con los
diciplinantes, bien que fueran el cura y el canónigo y barbero a detenelle;
mas no les fue posible, ni menos le detuvieron las voces que Sancho le
daba, diciendo:

-¿Adónde va, señor don Quijote? ¿Qué demonios lleva en el pecho, que le
incitan a ir contra nuestra fe católica? Advierta, mal haya yo, que aquélla
es procesión de diciplinantes, y que aquella señora que llevan sobre la
peana es la imagen benditísima de la Virgen sin mancilla; mire, señor, lo
que hace, que por esta vez se puede decir que no es lo que sabe.

Fatigóse en vano Sancho, porque su amo iba tan puesto en llegar a los
ensabanados y en librar a la señora enlutada, que no oyó palabra; y, aunque
la oyera, no volviera, si el rey se lo mandara. Llegó, pues, a la
procesión, y paró a Rocinante, que ya llevaba deseo de quietarse un poco,
y, con turbada y ronca voz, dijo:

-Vosotros, que, quizá por no ser buenos, os encubrís los rostros, atended y
escuchad lo que deciros quiero.

Los primeros que se detuvieron fueron los que la imagen llevaban; y uno de
los cuatro clérigos que cantaban las ledanías, viendo la estraña catadura
de don Quijote, la flaqueza de Rocinante y otras circunstancias de risa que
notó y descubrió en don Quijote, le respondió diciendo:

-Señor hermano, si nos quiere decir algo, dígalo presto, porque se van
estos hermanos abriendo las carnes, y no podemos, ni es razón que nos
detengamos a oír cosa alguna, si ya no es tan breve que en dos palabras se
diga.

-En una lo diré -replicó don Quijote-, y es ésta: que luego al punto dejéis
libre a esa hermosa señora, cuyas lágrimas y triste semblante dan claras
muestras que la lleváis contra su voluntad y que algún notorio desaguisado
le habedes fecho; y yo, que nací en el mundo para desfacer semejantes
agravios, no consentiré que un solo paso adelante pase sin darle la deseada
libertad que merece.

En estas razones, cayeron todos los que las oyeron que don Quijote debía de
ser algún hombre loco, y tomáronse a reír muy de gana; cuya risa fue poner
pólvora a la cólera de don Quijote, porque, sin decir más palabra, sacando
la espada, arremetió a las andas. Uno de aquellos que las llevaban, dejando
la carga a sus compañeros, salió al encuentro de don Quijote, enarbolando
una horquilla o bastón con que sustentaba las andas en tanto que
descansaba; y, recibiendo en ella una gran cuchillada que le tiró don
Quijote, con que se la hizo dos partes, con el último tercio, que le quedó
en la mano, dio tal golpe a don Quijote encima de un hombro, por el mismo
lado de la espada, que no pudo cubrir el adarga contra villana fuerza, que
el pobre don Quijote vino al suelo muy mal parado.

Sancho Panza, que jadeando le iba a los alcances, viéndole caído, dio voces
a su moledor que no le diese otro palo, porque era un pobre caballero
encantado, que no había hecho mal a nadie en todos los días de su vida.
Mas, lo que detuvo al villano no fueron las voces de Sancho, sino el ver
que don Quijote no bullía pie ni mano; y así, creyendo que le había muerto,
con priesa se alzó la túnica a la cinta, y dio a huir por la campaña como
un gamo.

Ya en esto llegaron todos los de la compañía de don Quijote adonde él
estaba; y más los de la procesión, que los vieron venir corriendo, y con
ellos los cuadrilleros con sus ballestas, temieron algún mal suceso, y
hiciéronse todos un remolino alrededor de la imagen; y, alzados los
capirotes, empuñando las diciplinas, y los clérigos los ciriales, esperaban
el asalto con determinación de defenderse, y aun ofender, si pudiesen, a
sus acometedores; pero la fortuna lo hizo mejor que se pensaba, porque
Sancho no hizo otra cosa que arrojarse sobre el cuerpo de su señor,
haciendo sobre él el más doloroso y risueño llanto del mundo, creyendo que
estaba muerto.

El cura fue conocido de otro cura que en la procesión venía, cuyo
conocimiento puso en sosiego el concebido temor de los dos escuadrones. El
primer cura dio al segundo, en dos razones, cuenta de quién era don
Quijote, y así él como toda la turba de los diciplinantes fueron a ver si
estaba muerto el pobre caballero, y oyeron que Sancho Panza, con lágrimas
en los ojos, decía:

-¡Oh flor de la caballería, que con solo un garrotazo acabaste la carrera
de tus tan bien gastados años! ¡Oh honra de tu linaje, honor y gloria de
toda la Mancha, y aun de todo el mundo, el cual, faltando tú en él, quedará
lleno de malhechores, sin temor de ser castigados de sus malas fechorías!
¡Oh liberal sobre todos los Alejandros, pues por solos ocho meses de
servicio me tenías dada la mejor ínsula que el mar ciñe y rodea! ¡Oh
humilde con los soberbios y arrogante con los humildes, acometedor de
peligros, sufridor de afrentas, enamorado sin causa, imitador de los
buenos, azote de los malos, enemigo de los ruines, en fin, caballero
andante, que es todo lo que decir se puede!

Con las voces y gemidos de Sancho revivió don Quijote, y la primer palabra
que dijo fue:

-El que de vos vive ausente, dulcísima Dulcinea, a mayores miserias que
éstas está sujeto. Ayúdame, Sancho amigo, a ponerme sobre el carro
encantado, que ya no estoy para oprimir la silla de Rocinante, porque tengo
todo este hombro hecho pedazos.

-Eso haré yo de muy buena gana, señor mío -respondió Sancho-, y volvamos a
mi aldea en compañía destos señores, que su bien desean, y allí daremos
orden de hacer otra salida que nos sea de más provecho y fama.

-Bien dices, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, y será gran prudencia dejar
pasar el mal influjo de las estrellas que agora corre.

El canónigo y el cura y barbero le dijeron que haría muy bien en hacer lo
que decía; y así, habiendo recebido grande gusto de las simplicidades de
Sancho Panza, pusieron a don Quijote en el carro, como antes venía. La
procesión volvió a ordenarse y a proseguir su camino; el cabrero se
despidió de todos; los cuadrilleros no quisieron pasar adelante, y el cura
les pagó lo que se les debía. El canónigo pidió al cura le avisase el
suceso de don Quijote, si sanaba de su locura o si proseguía en ella, y con
esto tomó licencia para seguir su viaje. En fin, todos se dividieron y
apartaron, quedando solos el cura y barbero, don Quijote y Panza, y el
bueno de Rocinante, que a todo lo que había visto estaba con tanta
paciencia como su amo.

El boyero unció sus bueyes y acomodó a don Quijote sobre un haz de heno, y
con su acostumbrada flema siguió el camino que el cura quiso, y a cabo de
seis días llegaron a la aldea de don Quijote, adonde entraron en la mitad
del día, que acertó a ser domingo, y la gente estaba toda en la plaza, por
mitad de la cual atravesó el carro de don Quijote. Acudieron todos a ver lo
que en el carro venía, y, cuando conocieron a su compatrioto, quedaron
maravillados, y un muchacho acudió corriendo a dar las nuevas a su ama y a
su sobrina de que su tío y su señor venía flaco y amarillo, y tendido sobre
un montón de heno y sobre un carro de bueyes. Cosa de lástima fue oír los
gritos que las dos buenas señoras alzaron, las bofetadas que se dieron, las
maldiciones que de nuevo echaron a los malditos libros de caballerías; todo
lo cual se renovó cuando vieron entrar a don Quijote por sus puertas.

A las nuevas desta venida de don Quijote, acudió la mujer de Sancho Panza,
que ya había sabido que había ido con él sirviéndole de escudero, y, así
como vio a Sancho, lo primero que le preguntó fue que si venía bueno el
asno. Sancho respondió que venía mejor que su amo.

-Gracias sean dadas a Dios -replicó ella-, que tanto bien me ha hecho; pero
contadme agora, amigo: ¿qué bien habéis sacado de vuestras escuderías?,
¿qué saboyana me traes a mí?, ¿qué zapaticos a vuestros hijos?

-No traigo nada deso -dijo Sancho-, mujer mía, aunque traigo otras cosas de
más momento y consideración.

-Deso recibo yo mucho gusto -respondió la mujer-; mostradme esas cosas de
más consideración y más momento, amigo mío, que las quiero ver, para que se
me alegre este corazón, que tan triste y descontento ha estado en todos los
siglos de vuestra ausencia.

-En casa os las mostraré, mujer -dijo Panza-, y por agora estad contenta,
que, siendo Dios servido de que otra vez salgamos en viaje a buscar
aventuras, vos me veréis presto conde o gobernador de una ínsula, y no de
las de por ahí, sino la mejor que pueda hallarse.

-Quiéralo así el cielo, marido mío; que bien lo habemos menester. Mas,
decidme: ¿qué es eso de ínsulas, que no lo entiendo?

-No es la miel para la boca del asno -respondió Sancho-; a su tiempo lo
verás, mujer, y aun te admirarás de oírte llamar Señoría de todos tus
vasallos.

-¿Qué es lo que decís, Sancho, de señorías, ínsulas y vasallos? -respondió
Juana Panza, que así se llamaba la mujer de Sancho, aunque no eran
parientes, sino porque se usa en la Mancha tomar las mujeres el apellido de
sus maridos.

-No te acucies, Juana, por saber todo esto tan apriesa; basta que te digo
verdad, y cose la boca. Sólo te sabré decir, así de paso, que no hay cosa
más gustosa en el mundo que ser un hombre honrado escudero de un caballero
andante buscador de aventuras. Bien es verdad que las más que se hallan no
salen tan a gusto como el hombre querría, porque de ciento que se
encuentran, las noventa y nueve suelen salir aviesas y torcidas. Sélo yo de
expiriencia, porque de algunas he salido manteado, y de otras molido; pero,
con todo eso, es linda cosa esperar los sucesos atravesando montes,
escudriñando selvas, pisando peñas, visitando castillos, alojando en ventas
a toda discreción, sin pagar, ofrecido sea al diablo, el maravedí.

Todas estas pláticas pasaron entre Sancho Panza y Juana Panza, su mujer, en
tanto que el ama y sobrina de don Quijote le recibieron, y le desnudaron, y
le tendieron en su antiguo lecho. Mirábalas él con ojos atravesados, y no
acababa de entender en qué parte estaba. El cura encargó a la sobrina
tuviese gran cuenta con regalar a su tío, y que estuviesen alerta de que
otra vez no se les escapase, contando lo que había sido menester para
traelle a su casa. Aquí alzaron las dos de nuevo los gritos al cielo; allí
se renovaron las maldiciones de los libros de caballerías, allí pidieron al
cielo que confundiese en el centro del abismo a los autores de tantas
mentiras y disparates. Finalmente, ellas quedaron confusas y temerosas de
que se habían de ver sin su amo y tío en el mesmo punto que tuviese alguna
mejoría; y sí fue como ellas se lo imaginaron.

Pero el autor desta historia, puesto que con curiosidad y diligencia ha
buscado los hechos que don Quijote hizo en su tercera salida, no ha podido
hallar noticia de ellas, a lo menos por escrituras auténticas; sólo la fama
ha guardado, en las memorias de la Mancha, que don Quijote, la tercera vez
que salió de su casa, fue a Zaragoza, donde se halló en unas famosas justas
que en aquella ciudad hicieron, y allí le pasaron cosas dignas de su valor
y buen entendimiento. Ni de su fin y acabamiento pudo alcanzar cosa alguna,
ni la alcanzara ni supiera si la buena suerte no le deparara un antiguo
médico que tenía en su poder una caja de plomo, que, según él dijo, se
había hallado en los cimientos derribados de una antigua ermita que se
renovaba; en la cual caja se habían hallado unos pergaminos escritos con
letras góticas, pero en versos castellanos, que contenían muchas de sus
hazañas y daban noticia de la hermosura de Dulcinea del Toboso, de la
figura de Rocinante, de la fidelidad de Sancho Panza y de la sepultura del
mesmo don Quijote, con diferentes epitafios y elogios de su vida y
costumbres.

Y los que se pudieron leer y sacar en limpio fueron los que aquí pone el
fidedigno autor desta nueva y jamás vista historia. El cual autor no pide a
los que la leyeren, en premio del inmenso trabajo que le costó inquerir y
buscar todos los archivos manchegos, por sacarla a luz, sino que le den el
mesmo crédito que suelen dar los discretos a los libros de caballerías, que
tan validos andan en el mundo; que con esto se tendrá por bien pagado y
satisfecho, y se animará a sacar y buscar otras, si no tan verdaderas, a lo
menos de tanta invención y pasatiempo.

Las palabras primeras que estaban escritas en el pergamino que se halló en
la caja de plomo eran éstas:

   LOS ACADÉMICOS DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
   LUGAR DE LA MANCHA,
   EN VIDA Y MUERTE DEL VALEROSO
   DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA,

HOC SCRIPSERUNT:

   EL MONICONGO, ACADÉMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
   A LA SEPULTURA DE DON QUIJOTE

Epitafio

   El calvatrueno que adornó a la Mancha
   de más despojos que Jasón decreta;
   el jüicio que tuvo la veleta
   aguda donde fuera mejor ancha,
   el brazo que su fuerza tanto ensancha,
   que llegó del Catay hasta Gaeta,
   la musa más horrenda y más discreta
   que grabó versos en la broncínea plancha,
   el que a cola dejó los Amadises,
   y en muy poquito a Galaores tuvo,
   estribando en su amor y bizarría,
   el que hizo callar los Belianises,
   aquel que en Rocinante errando anduvo,
   yace debajo desta losa fría.

DEL PANIAGUADO, ACADÉMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,

In laudem Dulcineae del Toboso

Soneto

   Esta que veis de rostro amondongado,
   alta de pechos y ademán brioso,
   es Dulcinea, reina del Toboso,
   de quien fue el gran Quijote aficionado.
   Pisó por ella el uno y otro lado
   de la gran Sierra Negra, y el famoso
   campo de Montïel, hasta el herboso
   llano de Aranjüez, a pie y cansado.
   Culpa de Rocinante, ¡oh dura estrella!,
   que esta manchega dama, y este invito
   andante caballero, en tiernos años,
   ella dejó, muriendo, de ser bella;
   y él, aunque queda en mármores escrito,
   no pudo huir de amor, iras y engaños.

   DEL CAPRICHOSO, DISCRETÍSIMO ACADÉMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
   EN LOOR DE ROCINANTE, CABALLO DE DON QUIJOTE DE LA MANCHA

Soneto

   En el soberbio trono diamantino
   que con sangrientas plantas huella Marte,
   frenético, el Manchego su estandarte
   tremola con esfuerzo peregrino.
   Cuelga las armas y el acero fino
   con que destroza, asuela, raja y parte:
   ¡nuevas proezas!, pero inventa el arte
   un nuevo estilo al nuevo paladino.
   Y si de su Amadís se precia Gaula,
   por cuyos bravos descendientes Grecia
   triunfó mil veces y su fama ensancha,
   hoy a Quijote le corona el aula
   do Belona preside, y dél se precia,
   más que Grecia ni Gaula, la alta Mancha.
   Nunca sus glorias el olvido mancha,
   pues hasta Rocinante, en ser gallardo,
   excede a Brilladoro y a Bayardo.

   DEL BURLADOR, ACADÉMICO ARGAMASILLESCO,
   A SANCHO PANZA

Soneto

   DEL CACHIDIABLO, ACADÉMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
   EN LA SEPULTURA DE DON QUIJOTE

Epitafio

   Aquí yace el caballero,
   bien molido y mal andante,
   a quien llevó Rocinante
   por uno y otro sendero.
   Sancho Panza el majadero
   yace también junto a él,
   escudero el más fïel
   que vio el trato de escudero.

   DEL TIQUITOC, ACADÉMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
   EN LA SEPULTURA DE DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO

Epitafio

   Reposa aquí Dulcinea;
   y, aunque de carnes rolliza,
   la volvió en polvo y ceniza
   la muerte espantable y fea.
   Fue de castiza ralea,
   y tuvo asomos de dama;
   del gran Quijote fue llama,
   y fue gloria de su aldea.

Éstos fueron los versos que se pudieron leer; los demás, por estar
carcomida la letra, se entregaron a un académico para que por conjeturas
los declarase. Tiénese noticia que lo ha hecho, a costa de muchas vigilias
y mucho trabajo, y que tiene intención de sacallos a luz, con esperanza de
la tercera salida de don Quijote.

Forsi altro canterà con miglior plectio.

Finis










Segunda parte del ingenioso caballero don Quijote de la Mancha


TASA

Yo, Hernando de Vallejo, escribano de Cámara del Rey nuestro señor, de los
que residen en su Consejo, doy fe que, habiéndose visto por los señores dél
un libro que compuso Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, intitulado Don Quijote
de la Mancha, Segunda parte, que con licencia de Su Majestad fue impreso,
le tasaron a cuatro maravedís cada pliego en papel, el cual tiene setenta y
tres pliegos, que al dicho respeto suma y monta docientos y noventa y dos
maravedís, y mandaron que esta tasa se ponga al principio de cada volumen
del dicho libro, para que se sepa y entienda lo que por él se ha de pedir y
llevar, sin que se exceda en ello en manera alguna, como consta y parece
por el auto y decreto original sobre ello dado, y que queda en mi poder,
a que me refiero; y de mandamiento de los dichos señores del Consejo y de
pedimiento de la parte del dicho Miguel de Cervantes, di esta fee en
Madrid, a veinte y uno días del mes de otubre del mil y seiscientos y
quince años.

Hernando de Vallejo.

FEE DE ERRATAS

Vi este libro intitulado Segunda parte de don Quijote de la Mancha,
compuesto por Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, y no hay en él cosa digna de
notar que no corresponda a su original. Dada en Madrid, a veinte y uno de
otubre, mil y seiscientos y quince.

El licenciado Francisco Murcia de la Llana.

APROBACIONES

APROBACIÓN

Por comisión y mandado de los señores del Consejo, he hecho ver el libro
contenido en este memorial: no contiene cosa contra la fe ni buenas
costumbres, antes es libro de mucho entretenimiento lícito, mezclado de
mucha filosofía moral; puédesele dar licencia para imprimirle. En Madrid, a
cinco de noviembre de mil seiscientos y quince.

Doctor Gutierre de Cetina.

APROBACIÓN

Por comisión y mandado de los señores del Consejo, he visto la Segunda
parte de don Quijote de la Mancha, por Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra: no
contiene cosa contra nuestra santa fe católica, ni buenas costumbres,
antes, muchas de honesta recreación y apacible divertimiento, que los
antiguos juzgaron convenientes a sus repúblicas, pues aun en la severa de
los lacedemonios levantaron estatua a la risa, y los de Tesalia la
dedicaron fiestas, como lo dice Pausanias, referido de Bosio, libro II De
signis Ecclesiae, cap. 10, alentando ánimos marchitos y espíritus
melancólicos, de que se acordó Tulio en el primero De legibus, y el poeta
diciendo:

Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis,

lo cual hace el autor mezclando las veras a las burlas, lo dulce a lo
provechoso y lo moral a lo faceto, disimulando en el cebo del donaire el
anzuelo de la reprehensión, y cumpliendo con el acertado asunto en que
pretende la expulsión de los libros de caballerías, pues con su buena
diligencia mañosamente alimpiando de su contagiosa dolencia a estos reinos,
es obra muy digna de su grande ingenio, honra y lustre de nuestra nación,
admiración y invidia de las estrañas. Éste es mi parecer, salvo etc. En
Madrid, a 17 de marzo de 1615.

El maestro Josef de Valdivielso.

APROBACIÓN

Por comisión del señor doctor Gutierre de Cetina, vicario general desta
villa de Madrid, corte de Su Majestad, he visto este libro de la Segunda
parte del ingenioso caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, por Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, y no hallo en él cosa indigna de un cristiano celo, ni
que disuene de la decencia debida a buen ejemplo, ni virtudes morales;
antes, mucha erudición y aprovechamiento, así en la continencia de su bien
seguido asunto para extirpar los vanos y mentirosos libros de caballerías,
cuyo contagio había cundido más de lo que fuera justo, como en la lisura
del lenguaje castellano, no adulterado con enfadosa y estudiada afectación,
vicio con razón aborrecido de hombres cuerdos; y en la correción de vicios
que generalmente toca, ocasionado de sus agudos discursos, guarda con tanta
cordura las leyes de reprehensión cristiana, que aquel que fuere tocado de
la enfermedad que pretende curar, en lo dulce y sabroso de sus medicinas
gustosamente habrá bebido, cuando menos lo imagine, sin empacho ni asco
alguno, lo provechoso de la detestación de su vicio, con que se hallará,
que es lo más difícil de conseguirse, gustoso y reprehendido. Ha habido
muchos que, por no haber sabido templar ni mezclar a propósito lo útil con
lo dulce, han dado con todo su molesto trabajo en tierra, pues no pudiendo
imitar a Diógenes en lo filósofo y docto, atrevida, por no decir licenciosa
y desalumbradamente, le pretenden imitar en lo cínico, entregándose a
maldicientes, inventando casos que no pasaron, para hacer capaz al vicio
que tocan de su áspera reprehensión, y por ventura descubren caminos para
seguirle, hasta entonces ignorados, con que vienen a quedar, si no
reprehensores, a lo menos maestros dél. Hácense odiosos a los bien
entendidos, con el pueblo pierden el crédito, si alguno tuvieron, para
admitir sus escritos y los vicios que arrojada e imprudentemente quisieren
corregir en muy peor estado que antes, que no todas las postemas a un mismo
tiempo están dispuestas para admitir las recetas o cauterios; antes,
algunos mucho mejor reciben las blandas y suaves medicinas, con cuya
aplicación, el atentado y docto médico consigue el fin de resolverlas,
término que muchas veces es mejor que no el que se alcanza con el rigor del
hierro. Bien diferente han sentido de los escritos de Miguel de
Cervantes, así nuestra nación como las estrañas, pues como a milagro desean
ver el autor de libros que con general aplauso, así por su decoro y
decencia como por la suavidad y blandura de sus discursos, han recebido
España, Francia, Italia, Alemania y Flandes. Certifico con verdad que en
veinte y cinco de febrero deste año de seiscientos y quince, habiendo ido
el ilustrísimo señor don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas, cardenal arzobispo
de Toledo, mi señor, a pagar la visita que a Su Ilustrísima hizo el
embajador de Francia, que vino a tratar cosas tocantes a los casamientos de
sus príncipes y los de España, muchos caballeros franceses, de los que
vinieron acompañando al embajador, tan corteses como entendidos y amigos de
buenas letras, se llegaron a mí y a otros capellanes del cardenal mi señor,
deseosos de saber qué libros de ingenio andaban más validos; y, tocando
acaso en éste que yo estaba censurando, apenas oyeron el nombre de Miguel
de Cervantes, cuando se comenzaron a hacer lenguas, encareciendo la
estimación en que, así en Francia como en los reinos sus confinantes, se
tenían sus obras: la Galatea, que alguno dellos tiene casi de memoria la
primera parte désta, y las Novelas. Fueron tantos sus encarecimientos,
que me ofrecí llevarles que viesen el autor dellas, que estimaron con mil
demostraciones de vivos deseos. Preguntáronme muy por menor su edad, su
profesión, calidad y cantidad. Halléme obligado a decir que era viejo,
soldado, hidalgo y pobre, a que uno respondió estas formales palabras:
''Pues, ¿a tal hombre no le tiene España muy rico y sustentado del erario
público?'' Acudió otro de aquellos caballeros con este pensamiento y con
mucha agudeza, y dijo: ''Si necesidad le ha de obligar a escribir, plega a
Dios que nunca tenga abundancia, para que con sus obras, siendo él pobre,
haga rico a todo el mundo''. Bien creo que está, para censura, un poco
larga; alguno dirá que toca los límites de lisonjero elogio; mas la verdad
de lo que cortamente digo deshace en el crítico la sospecha y en mí el
cuidado; además que el día de hoy no se lisonjea a quien no tiene con qué
cebar el pico del adulador, que, aunque afectuosa y falsamente dice de
burlas, pretende ser remunerado de veras. En Madrid, a veinte y siete de
febrero de mil y seiscientos y quince.

El licenciado Márquez Torres.

PRIVILEGIO

Por cuanto por parte de vos, Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, nos fue fecha
relación que habíades compuesto la Segunda parte de don Quijote de la
Mancha, de la cual hacíades presentación, y, por ser libro de historia
agradable y honesta, y haberos costado mucho trabajo y estudio, nos
suplicastes os mandásemos dar licencia para le poder imprimir y privilegio
por veinte años, o como la nuestra merced fuese; lo cual visto por los del
nuestro Consejo, por cuanto en el dicho libro se hizo la diligencia que la
premática por nos sobre ello fecha dispone, fue acordado que debíamos
mandar dar esta nuestra cédula en la dicha razón, y nos tuvímoslo por bien.
Por la cual vos damos licencia y facultad para que, por tiempo y espacio de
diez años, cumplidos primeros siguientes, que corran y se cuenten desde el
día de la fecha de esta nuestra cédula en adelante, vos, o la persona que
para ello vuestro poder hobiere, y no otra alguna, podáis imprimir y vender
el dicho libro que desuso se hace mención; y por la presente damos licencia
y facultad a cualquier impresor de nuestros reinos que nombráredes para que
durante el dicho tiempo le pueda imprimir por el original que en el nuestro
Consejo se vio, que va rubricado y firmado al fin de Hernando de Vallejo,
nuestro escribano de Cámara, y uno de los que en él residen, con que antes
y primero que se venda lo traigáis ante ellos, juntamente con el dicho
original, para que se vea si la dicha impresión está conforme a él, o
traigáis fe en pública forma cómo, por corretor por nos nombrado, se vio y
corrigió la dicha impresión por el dicho original, y más al dicho impresor
que ansí imprimiere el dicho libro no imprima el principio y primer pliego
dél, ni entregue más de un solo libro con el original al autor y persona a
cuya costa lo imprimiere, ni a otra alguna, para efecto de la dicha
correción y tasa, hasta que antes y primero el dicho libro esté corregido y
tasado por los del nuestro Consejo, y estando hecho, y no de otra manera,
pueda imprimir el dicho principio y primer pliego, en el cual imediatamente
ponga esta nuestra licencia y la aprobación, tasa y erratas, ni lo podáis
vender ni vendáis vos ni otra persona alguna, hasta que esté el dicho libro
en la forma susodicha, so pena de caer e incurrir en las penas contenidas
en la dicha premática y leyes de nuestros reinos que sobre ello disponen; y
más, que durante el dicho tiempo persona alguna sin vuestra licencia no le
pueda imprimir ni vender, so pena que el que lo imprimiere y vendiere haya
perdido y pierda cualesquiera libros, moldes y aparejos que dél tuviere, y
más incurra en pena de cincuenta mil maravedís por cada vez que lo
contrario hiciere, de la cual dicha pena sea la tercia parte para nuestra
Cámara, y la otra tercia parte para el juez que lo sentenciare, y la otra
tercia parte par el que lo denunciare; y más a los del nuestro Consejo,
presidentes, oidores de las nuestras Audiencias, alcaldes, alguaciles de la
nuestra Casa y Corte y Chancillerías, y a otras cualesquiera justicias de
todas las ciudades, villas y lugares de los nuestros reinos y señoríos, y a
cada uno en su juridición, ansí a los que agora son como a los que serán de
aquí adelante, que vos guarden y cumplan esta nuestra cédula y merced, que
ansí vos hacemos, y contra ella no vayan ni pasen en manera alguna, so pena
de la nuestra merced y de diez mil maravedís para la nuestra Cámara. Dada
en Madrid, a treinta días del mes de marzo de mil y seiscientos y quince
años.

YO, EL REY.

Por mandado del Rey nuestro señor:

Pedro de Contreras.

PRÓLOGO AL LECTOR

¡Válame Dios, y con cuánta gana debes de estar esperando ahora, lector
ilustre, o quier plebeyo, este prólogo, creyendo hallar en él venganzas,
riñas y vituperios del autor del segundo Don Quijote; digo de aquel que
dicen que se engendró en Tordesillas y nació en Tarragona! Pues en verdad
que no te he dar este contento; que, puesto que los agravios despiertan la
cólera en los más humildes pechos, en el mío ha de padecer excepción esta
regla. Quisieras tú que lo diera del asno, del mentecato y del atrevido,
pero no me pasa por el pensamiento: castíguele su pecado, con su pan se lo
coma y allá se lo haya. Lo que no he podido dejar de sentir es que me note
de viejo y de manco, como si hubiera sido en mi mano haber detenido el
tiempo, que no pasase por mí, o si mi manquedad hubiera nacido en alguna
taberna, sino en la más alta ocasión que vieron los siglos pasados, los
presentes, ni esperan ver los venideros. Si mis heridas no resplandecen en
los ojos de quien las mira, son estimadas, a lo menos, en la estimación de
los que saben dónde se cobraron; que el soldado más bien parece muerto en
la batalla que libre en la fuga; y es esto en mí de manera, que si ahora me
propusieran y facilitaran un imposible, quisiera antes haberme hallado en
aquella facción prodigiosa que sano ahora de mis heridas sin haberme
hallado en ella. Las que el soldado muestra en el rostro y en los pechos,
estrellas son que guían a los demás al cielo de la honra, y al de desear la
justa alabanza; y hase de advertir que no se escribe con las canas, sino
con el entendimiento, el cual suele mejorarse con los años.

He sentido también que me llame invidioso, y que, como a ignorante, me
describa qué cosa sea la invidia; que, en realidad de verdad, de dos que
hay, yo no conozco sino a la santa, a la noble y bien intencionada; y,
siendo esto así, como lo es, no tengo yo de perseguir a ningún sacerdote, y
más si tiene por añadidura ser familiar del Santo Oficio; y si él lo dijo
por quien parece que lo dijo, engañóse de todo en todo: que del tal adoro
el ingenio, admiro las obras y la ocupación continua y virtuosa. Pero, en
efecto, le agradezco a este señor autor el decir que mis novelas son más
satíricas que ejemplares, pero que son buenas; y no lo pudieran ser si no
tuvieran de todo.

Paréceme que me dices que ando muy limitado y que me contengo mucho en los
términos de mi modestia, sabiendo que no se ha añadir aflición al afligido,
y que la que debe de tener este señor sin duda es grande, pues no osa
parecer a campo abierto y al cielo claro, encubriendo su nombre, fingiendo
su patria, como si hubiera hecho alguna traición de lesa majestad. Si, por
ventura, llegares a conocerle, dile de mi parte que no me tengo por
agraviado: que bien sé lo que son tentaciones del demonio, y que una de las
mayores es ponerle a un hombre en el entendimiento que puede componer y
imprimir un libro, con que gane tanta fama como dineros, y tantos dineros
cuanta fama; y, para confirmación desto, quiero que en tu buen donaire y
gracia le cuentes este cuento:

«Había en Sevilla un loco que dio en el más gracioso disparate y tema que
dio loco en el mundo. Y fue que hizo un cañuto de caña puntiagudo en el
fin, y, en cogiendo algún perro en la calle, o en cualquiera otra parte,
con el un pie le cogía el suyo, y el otro le alzaba con la mano, y como
mejor podía le acomodaba el cañuto en la parte que, soplándole, le ponía
redondo como una pelota; y, en teniéndolo desta suerte, le daba dos
palmaditas en la barriga, y le soltaba, diciendo a los circunstantes, que
siempre eran muchos: ''¿Pensarán vuestras mercedes ahora que es poco
trabajo hinchar un perro?''»

¿Pensará vuestra merced ahora que es poco trabajo hacer un libro?

Y si este cuento no le cuadrare, dirásle, lector amigo, éste, que también
es de loco y de perro:

«Había en Córdoba otro loco, que tenía por costumbre de traer encima de la
cabeza un pedazo de losa de mármol, o un canto no muy liviano, y, en
topando algún perro descuidado, se le ponía junto, y a plomo dejaba caer
sobre él el peso. Amohinábase el perro, y, dando ladridos y aullidos, no
paraba en tres calles. Sucedió, pues, que, entre los perros que descargó la
carga, fue uno un perro de un bonetero, a quien quería mucho su dueño. Bajó
el canto, diole en la cabeza, alzó el grito el molido perro, violo y
sintiólo su amo, asió de una vara de medir, y salió al loco y no le dejó
hueso sano; y cada palo que le daba decía: ''Perro ladrón, ¿a mi podenco?
¿No viste, cruel, que era podenco mi perro?'' Y, repitiéndole el nombre de
podenco muchas veces, envió al loco hecho una alheña. Escarmentó el loco y
retiróse, y en más de un mes no salió a la plaza; al cabo del cual tiempo,
volvió con su invención y con más carga. Llegábase donde estaba el perro,
y, mirándole muy bien de hito en hito, y sin querer ni atreverse a
descargar la piedra, decía: ''Este es podenco: ¡guarda!'' En efeto, todos
cuantos perros topaba, aunque fuesen alanos, o gozques, decía que eran
podencos; y así, no soltó más el canto.»

Quizá de esta suerte le podrá acontecer a este historiador: que no se
atreverá a soltar más la presa de su ingenio en libros que, en siendo
malos, son más duros que las peñas.

Dile también que de la amenaza que me hace, que me ha de quitar la ganancia
con su libro, no se me da un ardite, que, acomodándome al entremés famoso
de La Perendenga, le respondo que me viva el Veinte y cuatro, mi señor, y
Cristo con todos. Viva el gran conde de Lemos, cuya cristiandad y
liberalidad, bien conocida, contra todos los golpes de mi corta fortuna me
tiene en pie, y vívame la suma caridad del ilustrísimo de Toledo, don
Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas, y siquiera no haya emprentas en el mundo, y
siquiera se impriman contra mí más libros que tienen letras las Coplas de
Mingo Revulgo. Estos dos príncipes, sin que los solicite adulación mía ni
otro género de aplauso, por sola su bondad, han tomado a su cargo el
hacerme merced y favorecerme; en lo que me tengo por más dichoso y más rico
que si la fortuna por camino ordinario me hubiera puesto en su cumbre. La
honra puédela tener el pobre, pero no el vicioso; la pobreza puede anublar
a la nobleza, pero no escurecerla del todo; pero, como la virtud dé alguna
luz de sí, aunque sea por los inconvenientes y resquicios de la estrecheza,
viene a ser estimada de los altos y nobles espíritus, y, por el
consiguiente, favorecida.

Y no le digas más, ni yo quiero decirte más a ti, sino advertirte que
consideres que esta segunda parte de Don Quijote que te ofrezco es cortada
del mismo artífice y del mesmo paño que la primera, y que en ella te doy a
don Quijote dilatado, y, finalmente, muerto y sepultado, porque ninguno se
atreva a levantarle nuevos testimonios, pues bastan los pasados y basta
también que un hombre honrado haya dado noticia destas discretas locuras,
sin querer de nuevo entrarse en ellas: que la abundancia de las cosas,
aunque sean buenas, hace que no se estimen, y la carestía, aun de las
malas, se estima en algo. Olvídaseme de decirte que esperes el Persiles,
que ya estoy acabando, y la segunda parte de Galatea.

DEDICATORIA, AL CONDE DE LEMOS

Enviando a Vuestra Excelencia los días pasados mis comedias, antes impresas
que representadas, si bien me acuerdo, dije que don Quijote quedaba
calzadas las espuelas para ir a besar las manos a Vuestra Excelencia; y
ahora digo que se las ha calzado y se ha puesto en camino, y si él allá
llega, me parece que habré hecho algún servicio a Vuestra Excelencia,
porque es mucha la priesa que de infinitas partes me dan a que le envíe
para quitar el hámago y la náusea que ha causado otro don Quijote, que, con
nombre de segunda parte, se ha disfrazado y corrido por el orbe; y el que
más ha mostrado desearle ha sido el grande emperador de la China, pues en
lengua chinesca habrá un mes que me escribió una carta con un propio,
pidiéndome, o, por mejor decir, suplicándome se le enviase, porque quería
fundar un colegio donde se leyese la lengua castellana, y quería que el
libro que se leyese fuese el de la historia de don Quijote. Juntamente con
esto, me decía que fuese yo a ser el rector del tal colegio.

Preguntéle al portador si Su Majestad le había dado para mí alguna ayuda de
costa. Respondióme que ni por pensamiento. ''Pues, hermano -le respondí
yo-, vos os podéis volver a vuestra China a las diez, o a las veinte, o a
las que venís despachado, porque yo no estoy con salud para ponerme en tan
largo viaje; además que, sobre estar enfermo, estoy muy sin dineros, y
emperador por emperador, y monarca por monarca, en Nápoles tengo al grande
conde de Lemos, que, sin tantos titulillos de colegios ni rectorías, me
sustenta, me ampara y hace más merced que la que yo acierto a desear''.

Con esto le despedí, y con esto me despido, ofreciendo a Vuestra Excelencia
los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, libro a quien daré fin dentro de
cuatro meses, Deo volente; el cual ha de ser o el más malo o el mejor que
en nuestra lengua se haya compuesto, quiero decir de los de
entretenimiento; y digo que me arrepiento de haber dicho el más malo,
porque, según la opinión de mis amigos, ha de llegar al estremo de bondad
posible.

Venga Vuestra Excelencia con la salud que es deseado; que ya estará
Persiles para besarle las manos, y yo los pies, como criado que soy de
Vuestra Excelencia. De Madrid, último de otubre de mil seiscientos y
quince.

Criado de Vuestra Excelencia,

Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.





Capítulo Primero. De lo que el cura y el barbero pasaron con don Quijote
cerca de su enfermedad


Cuenta Cide Hamete Benengeli, en la segunda parte desta historia y tercera
salida de don Quijote, que el cura y el barbero se estuvieron casi un mes
sin verle, por no renovarle y traerle a la memoria las cosas pasadas; pero
no por esto dejaron de visitar a su sobrina y a su ama, encargándolas
tuviesen cuenta con regalarle, dándole a comer cosas confortativas y
apropiadas para el corazón y el celebro, de donde procedía, según buen
discurso, toda su mala ventura. Las cuales dijeron que así lo hacían, y lo
harían, con la voluntad y cuidado posible, porque echaban de ver que su
señor por momentos iba dando muestras de estar en su entero juicio; de lo
cual recibieron los dos gran contento, por parecerles que habían acertado
en haberle traído encantado en el carro de los bueyes, como se contó en la
primera parte desta tan grande como puntual historia, en su último
capítulo. Y así, determinaron de visitarle y hacer esperiencia de su
mejoría, aunque tenían casi por imposible que la tuviese, y acordaron de no
tocarle en ningún punto de la andante caballería, por no ponerse a peligro
de descoser los de la herida, que tan tiernos estaban.

Visitáronle, en fin, y halláronle sentado en la cama, vestida una almilla
de bayeta verde, con un bonete colorado toledano; y estaba tan seco y
amojamado, que no parecía sino hecho de carne momia. Fueron dél muy bien
recebidos, preguntáronle por su salud, y él dio cuenta de sí y de ella con
mucho juicio y con muy elegantes palabras; y en el discurso de su plática
vinieron a tratar en esto que llaman razón de estado y modos de gobierno,
enmendando este abuso y condenando aquél, reformando una costumbre y
desterrando otra, haciéndose cada uno de los tres un nuevo legislador, un
Licurgo moderno o un Solón flamante; y de tal manera renovaron la
república, que no pareció sino que la habían puesto en una fragua, y sacado
otra de la que pusieron; y habló don Quijote con tanta discreción en todas
las materias que se tocaron, que los dos esaminadores creyeron
indubitadamente que estaba del todo bueno y en su entero juicio.

Halláronse presentes a la plática la sobrina y ama, y no se hartaban de dar
gracias a Dios de ver a su señor con tan buen entendimiento; pero el cura,
mudando el propósito primero, que era de no tocarle en cosa de caballerías,
quiso hacer de todo en todo esperiencia si la sanidad de don Quijote era
falsa o verdadera, y así, de lance en lance, vino a contar algunas nuevas
que habían venido de la corte; y, entre otras, dijo que se tenía por cierto
que el Turco bajaba con una poderosa armada, y que no se sabía su designio,
ni adónde había de descargar tan gran nublado; y, con este temor, con que
casi cada año nos toca arma, estaba puesta en ella toda la cristiandad, y
Su Majestad había hecho proveer las costas de Nápoles y Sicilia y la isla
de Malta. A esto respondió don Quijote:

-Su Majestad ha hecho como prudentísimo guerrero en proveer sus estados con
tiempo, porque no le halle desapercebido el enemigo; pero si se tomara mi
consejo, aconsejárale yo que usara de una prevención, de la cual Su
Majestad la hora de agora debe estar muy ajeno de pensar en ella.

Apenas oyó esto el cura, cuando dijo entre sí:

-¡Dios te tenga de su mano, pobre don Quijote: que me parece que te
despeñas de la alta cumbre de tu locura hasta el profundo abismo de tu
simplicidad!

Mas el barbero, que ya había dado en el mesmo pensamiento que el cura,
preguntó a don Quijote cuál era la advertencia de la prevención que decía
era bien se hiciese; quizá podría ser tal, que se pusiese en la lista de
los muchos advertimientos impertinentes que se suelen dar a los príncipes.

-El mío, señor rapador -dijo don Quijote-, no será impertinente, sino
perteneciente.

-No lo digo por tanto -replicó el barbero-, sino porque tiene mostrado la
esperiencia que todos o los más arbitrios que se dan a Su Majestad, o son
imposibles, o disparatados, o en daño del rey o del reino.

-Pues el mío -respondió don Quijote- ni es imposible ni disparatado, sino
el más fácil, el más justo y el más mañero y breve que puede caber en
pensamiento de arbitrante alguno.

-Ya tarda en decirle vuestra merced, señor don Quijote -dijo el cura.

-No querría -dijo don Quijote- que le dijese yo aquí agora, y amaneciese
mañana en los oídos de los señores consejeros, y se llevase otro las
gracias y el premio de mi trabajo.

-Por mí -dijo el barbero-, doy la palabra, para aquí y para delante de
Dios, de no decir lo que vuestra merced dijere a rey ni a roque, ni a
hombre terrenal, juramento que aprendí del romance del cura que en el
prefacio avisó al rey del ladrón que le había robado las cien doblas y la
su mula la andariega.

-No sé historias -dijo don Quijote-, pero sé que es bueno ese juramento, en
fee de que sé que es hombre de bien el señor barbero.

-Cuando no lo fuera -dijo el cura-, yo le abono y salgo por él, que en este
caso no hablará más que un mudo, so pena de pagar lo juzgado y sentenciado.

-Y a vuestra merced, ¿quién le fía, señor cura? -dijo don Quijote.

-Mi profesión -respondió el cura-, que es de guardar secreto.

-¡Cuerpo de tal! -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-. ¿Hay más, sino mandar Su
Majestad por público pregón que se junten en la corte para un día señalado
todos los caballeros andantes que vagan por España; que, aunque no viniesen
sino media docena, tal podría venir entre ellos, que solo bastase a
destruir toda la potestad del Turco? Esténme vuestras mercedes atentos, y
vayan conmigo. ¿Por ventura es cosa nueva deshacer un solo caballero
andante un ejército de docientos mil hombres, como si todos juntos tuvieran
una sola garganta, o fueran hechos de alfenique? Si no, díganme: ¿cuántas
historias están llenas destas maravillas? ¡Había, en hora mala para mí, que
no quiero decir para otro, de vivir hoy el famoso don Belianís, o alguno de
los del inumerable linaje de Amadís de Gaula; que si alguno déstos hoy
viviera y con el Turco se afrontara, a fee que no le arrendara la ganancia!
Pero Dios mirará por su pueblo, y deparará alguno que, si no tan bravo como
los pasados andantes caballeros, a lo menos no les será inferior en el
ánimo; y Dios me entiende, y no digo más.

-¡Ay! -dijo a este punto la sobrina-; ¡que me maten si no quiere mi señor
volver a ser caballero andante!

A lo que dijo don Quijote:

-Caballero andante he de morir, y baje o suba el Turco cuando él quisiere y
cuan poderosamente pudiere; que otra vez digo que Dios me entiende.

A esta sazón dijo el barbero:

-Suplico a vuestras mercedes que se me dé licencia para contar un cuento
breve que sucedió en Sevilla, que, por venir aquí como de molde, me da gana
de contarle.

Dio la licencia don Quijote, y el cura y los demás le prestaron atención, y
él comenzó desta manera:

-«En la casa de los locos de Sevilla estaba un hombre a quien sus parientes
habían puesto allí por falto de juicio. Era graduado en cánones por Osuna,
pero, aunque lo fuera por Salamanca, según opinión de muchos, no dejara de
ser loco. Este tal graduado, al cabo de algunos años de recogimiento, se
dio a entender que estaba cuerdo y en su entero juicio, y con esta
imaginación escribió al arzobispo, suplicándole encarecidamente y con muy
concertadas razones le mandase sacar de aquella miseria en que vivía, pues
por la misericordia de Dios había ya cobrado el juicio perdido; pero que
sus parientes, por gozar de la parte de su hacienda, le tenían allí, y, a
pesar de la verdad, querían que fuese loco hasta la muerte.

»El arzobispo, persuadido de muchos billetes concertados y discretos, mandó
a un capellán suyo se informase del retor de la casa si era verdad lo que
aquel licenciado le escribía, y que asimesmo hablase con el loco, y que si
le pareciese que tenía juicio, le sacase y pusiese en libertad. Hízolo así
el capellán, y el retor le dijo que aquel hombre aún se estaba loco: que,
puesto que hablaba muchas veces como persona de grande entendimiento, al
cabo disparaba con tantas necedades, que en muchas y en grandes igualaban a
sus primeras discreciones, como se podía hacer la esperiencia hablándole.
Quiso hacerla el capellán, y, poniéndole con el loco, habló con él una hora
y más, y en todo aquel tiempo jamás el loco dijo razón torcida ni
disparatada; antes, habló tan atentadamente, que el capellán fue forzado a
creer que el loco estaba cuerdo; y entre otras cosas que el loco le dijo
fue que el retor le tenía ojeriza, por no perder los regalos que sus
parientes le hacían porque dijese que aún estaba loco, y con lúcidos
intervalos; y que el mayor contrario que en su desgracia tenía era su mucha
hacienda, pues, por gozar della sus enemigos, ponían dolo y dudaban de la
merced que Nuestro Señor le había hecho en volverle de bestia en hombre.
Finalmente, él habló de manera que hizo sospechoso al retor, codiciosos y
desalmados a sus parientes, y a él tan discreto que el capellán se
determinó a llevársele consigo a que el arzobispo le viese y tocase con la
mano la verdad de aquel negocio.

»Con esta buena fee, el buen capellán pidió al retor mandase dar los
vestidos con que allí había entrado el licenciado; volvió a decir el retor
que mirase lo que hacía, porque, sin duda alguna, el licenciado aún se
estaba loco. No sirvieron de nada para con el capellán las prevenciones y
advertimientos del retor para que dejase de llevarle; obedeció el retor,
viendo ser orden del arzobispo; pusieron al licenciado sus vestidos, que
eran nuevos y decentes, y, como él se vio vestido de cuerdo y desnudo de
loco, suplicó al capellán que por caridad le diese licencia para ir a
despedirse de sus compañeros los locos. El capellán dijo que él le quería
acompañar y ver los locos que en la casa había. Subieron, en efeto, y con
ellos algunos que se hallaron presentes; y, llegado el licenciado a una
jaula adonde estaba un loco furioso, aunque entonces sosegado y quieto, le
dijo: ''Hermano mío, mire si me manda algo, que me voy a mi casa; que ya
Dios ha sido servido, por su infinita bondad y misericordia, sin yo
merecerlo, de volverme mi juicio: ya estoy sano y cuerdo; que acerca del
poder de Dios ninguna cosa es imposible. Tenga grande esperanza y confianza
en Él, que, pues a mí me ha vuelto a mi primero estado, también le volverá
a él si en Él confía. Yo tendré cuidado de enviarle algunos regalos que
coma, y cómalos en todo caso, que le hago saber que imagino, como quien ha
pasado por ello, que todas nuestras locuras proceden de tener los estómagos
vacíos y los celebros llenos de aire. Esfuércese, esfuércese, que el
descaecimiento en los infortunios apoca la salud y acarrea la muerte''.

»Todas estas razones del licenciado escuchó otro loco que estaba en otra
jaula, frontero de la del furioso, y, levantándose de una estera vieja
donde estaba echado y desnudo en cueros, preguntó a grandes voces quién era
el que se iba sano y cuerdo. El licenciado respondió: ''Yo soy, hermano, el
que me voy; que ya no tengo necesidad de estar más aquí, por lo que doy
infinitas gracias a los cielos, que tan grande merced me han hecho''.
''Mirad lo que decís, licenciado, no os engañe el diablo -replicó el loco-;
sosegad el pie, y estaos quedito en vuestra casa, y ahorraréis la vuelta''.
''Yo sé que estoy bueno -replicó el licenciado-, y no habrá para qué tornar
a andar estaciones''. ''¿Vos bueno? -dijo el loco-: agora bien, ello dirá;
andad con Dios, pero yo os voto a Júpiter, cuya majestad yo represento en
la tierra, que por solo este pecado que hoy comete Sevilla, en sacaros
desta casa y en teneros por cuerdo, tengo de hacer un tal castigo en ella,
que quede memoria dél por todos los siglos del los siglos, amén. ¿No sabes
tú, licenciadillo menguado, que lo podré hacer, pues, como digo, soy
Júpiter Tonante, que tengo en mis manos los rayos abrasadores con que puedo
y suelo amenazar y destruir el mundo? Pero con sola una cosa quiero
castigar a este ignorante pueblo, y es con no llover en él ni en todo su
distrito y contorno por tres enteros años, que se han de contar desde el
día y punto en que ha sido hecha esta amenaza en adelante. ¿Tú libre, tú
sano, tú cuerdo, y yo loco, y yo enfermo, y yo atado...? Así pienso llover
como pensar ahorcarme''.

»A las voces y a las razones del loco estuvieron los circustantes atentos,
pero nuestro licenciado, volviéndose a nuestro capellán y asiéndole de las
manos, le dijo: ''No tenga vuestra merced pena, señor mío, ni haga caso de
lo que este loco ha dicho, que si él es Júpiter y no quisiere llover, yo,
que soy Neptuno, el padre y el dios de las aguas, lloveré todas las veces
que se me antojare y fuere menester''. A lo que respondió el capellán:
''Con todo eso, señor Neptuno, no será bien enojar al señor Júpiter:
vuestra merced se quede en su casa, que otro día, cuando haya más comodidad
y más espacio, volveremos por vuestra merced''. Rióse el retor y los
presentes, por cuya risa se medio corrió el capellán; desnudaron al
licenciado, quedóse en casa y acabóse el cuento.»

-Pues, ¿éste es el cuento, señor barbero -dijo don Quijote-, que, por venir
aquí como de molde, no podía dejar de contarle? ¡Ah, señor rapista, señor
rapista, y cuán ciego es aquel que no vee por tela de cedazo! Y ¿es posible
que vuestra merced no sabe que las comparaciones que se hacen de ingenio a
ingenio, de valor a valor, de hermosura a hermosura y de linaje a linaje
son siempre odiosas y mal recebidas? Yo, señor barbero, no soy Neptuno, el
dios de las aguas, ni procuro que nadie me tenga por discreto no lo siendo;
sólo me fatigo por dar a entender al mundo en el error en que está en no
renovar en sí el felicísimo tiempo donde campeaba la orden de la andante
caballería. Pero no es merecedora la depravada edad nuestra de gozar tanto
bien como el que gozaron las edades donde los andantes caballeros tomaron a
su cargo y echaron sobre sus espaldas la defensa de los reinos, el amparo
de las doncellas, el socorro de los huérfanos y pupilos, el castigo de los
soberbios y el premio de los humildes. Los más de los caballeros que agora
se usan, antes les crujen los damascos, los brocados y otras ricas telas de
que se visten, que la malla con que se arman; ya no hay caballero que
duerma en los campos, sujeto al rigor del cielo, armado de todas armas
desde los pies a la cabeza; y ya no hay quien, sin sacar los pies de los
estribos, arrimado a su lanza, sólo procure descabezar, como dicen, el
sueño, como lo hacían los caballeros andantes. Ya no hay ninguno que,
saliendo deste bosque, entre en aquella montaña, y de allí pise una estéril
y desierta playa del mar, las más veces proceloso y alterado, y, hallando
en ella y en su orilla un pequeño batel sin remos, vela, mástil ni jarcia
alguna, con intrépido corazón se arroje en él, entregándose a las
implacables olas del mar profundo, que ya le suben al cielo y ya le bajan
al abismo; y él, puesto el pecho a la incontrastable borrasca, cuando menos
se cata, se halla tres mil y más leguas distante del lugar donde se
embarcó, y, saltando en tierra remota y no conocida, le suceden cosas
dignas de estar escritas, no en pergaminos, sino en bronces. Mas agora, ya
triunfa la pereza de la diligencia, la ociosidad del trabajo, el vicio de
la virtud, la arrogancia de la valentía y la teórica de la práctica de las
armas, que sólo vivieron y resplandecieron en las edades del oro y en los
andantes caballeros. Si no, díganme: ¿quién más honesto y más valiente que
el famoso Amadís de Gaula?; ¿quién más discreto que Palmerín de
Inglaterra?; ¿quién más acomodado y manual que Tirante el Blanco?; ¿quién
más galán que Lisuarte de Grecia?; ¿quién más acuchillado ni acuchillador
que don Belianís?; ¿quién más intrépido que Perión de Gaula, o quién más
acometedor de peligros que Felixmarte de Hircania, o quién más sincero que
Esplandián?; ¿quién mas arrojado que don Cirongilio de Tracia?; ¿quién más
bravo que Rodamonte?; ¿quién más prudente que el rey Sobrino?; ¿quién más
atrevido que Reinaldos?; ¿quién más invencible que Roldán?; y ¿quién más
gallardo y más cortés que Rugero, de quien decienden hoy los duques de
Ferrara, según Turpín en su Cosmografía? Todos estos caballeros, y otros
muchos que pudiera decir, señor cura, fueron caballeros andantes, luz y
gloria de la caballería. Déstos, o tales como éstos, quisiera yo que fueran
los de mi arbitrio, que, a serlo, Su Majestad se hallara bien servido y
ahorrara de mucho gasto, y el Turco se quedara pelando las barbas, y con
esto, no quiero quedar en mi casa, pues no me saca el capellán della; y si
su Júpiter, como ha dicho el barbero, no lloviere, aquí estoy yo, que
lloveré cuando se me antojare. Digo esto porque sepa el señor Bacía que le
entiendo.

-En verdad, señor don Quijote -dijo el barbero-, que no lo dije por tanto,
y así me ayude Dios como fue buena mi intención, y que no debe vuestra
merced sentirse.

-Si puedo sentirme o no -respondió don Quijote-, yo me lo sé.

A esto dijo el cura:

-Aun bien que yo casi no he hablado palabra hasta ahora, y no quisiera
quedar con un escrúpulo que me roe y escarba la conciencia, nacido de lo
que aquí el señor don Quijote ha dicho.

-Para otras cosas más -respondió don Quijote- tiene licencia el señor cura;
y así, puede decir su escrúpulo, porque no es de gusto andar con la
conciencia escrupulosa.

-Pues con ese beneplácito -respondió el cura-, digo que mi escrúpulo es que
no me puedo persuadir en ninguna manera a que toda la caterva de caballeros
andantes que vuestra merced, señor don Quijote, ha referido, hayan sido
real y verdaderamente personas de carne y hueso en el mundo; antes, imagino
que todo es ficción, fábula y mentira, y sueños contados por hombres
despiertos, o, por mejor decir, medio dormidos.

-Ése es otro error -respondió don Quijote- en que han caído muchos, que no
creen que haya habido tales caballeros en el mundo; y yo muchas veces,
con diversas gentes y ocasiones, he procurado sacar a la luz de la verdad
este casi común engaño; pero algunas veces no he salido con mi intención, y
otras sí, sustentándola sobre los hombros de la verdad; la cual verdad es
tan cierta, que estoy por decir que con mis propios ojos vi a Amadís de
Gaula, que era un hombre alto de cuerpo, blanco de rostro, bien puesto de
barba, aunque negra, de vista entre blanda y rigurosa, corto de razones,
tardo en airarse y presto en deponer la ira; y del modo que he delineado a
Amadís pudiera, a mi parecer, pintar y descubrir todos cuantos caballeros
andantes andan en las historias en el orbe, que, por la aprehensión que
tengo de que fueron como sus historias cuentan, y por las hazañas que
hicieron y condiciones que tuvieron, se pueden sacar por buena filosofía
sus faciones, sus colores y estaturas.

-¿Que tan grande le parece a vuestra merced, mi señor don Quijote -preguntó
el barbero-, debía de ser el gigante Morgante?

-En esto de gigantes -respondió don Quijote- hay diferentes opiniones, si
los ha habido o no en el mundo; pero la Santa Escritura, que no puede
faltar un átomo en la verdad, nos muestra que los hubo, contándonos la
historia de aquel filisteazo de Golías, que tenía siete codos y medio de
altura, que es una desmesurada grandeza. También en la isla de Sicilia se
han hallado canillas y espaldas tan grandes, que su grandeza manifiesta que
fueron gigantes sus dueños, y tan grandes como grandes torres; que la
geometría saca esta verdad de duda. Pero, con todo esto, no sabré decir con
certidumbre qué tamaño tuviese Morgante, aunque imagino que no debió de ser
muy alto; y muéveme a ser deste parecer hallar en la historia donde se hace
mención particular de sus hazañas que muchas veces dormía debajo de
techado; y, pues hallaba casa donde cupiese, claro está que no era
desmesurada su grandeza.

-Así es -dijo el cura.

El cual, gustando de oírle decir tan grandes disparates, le preguntó que
qué sentía acerca de los rostros de Reinaldos de Montalbán y de don Roldán,
y de los demás Doce Pares de Francia, pues todos habían sido caballeros
andantes.

-De Reinaldos -respondió don Quijote- me atrevo a decir que era ancho de
rostro, de color bermejo, los ojos bailadores y algo saltados, puntoso y
colérico en demasía, amigo de ladrones y de gente perdida. De Roldán, o
Rotolando, o Orlando, que con todos estos nombres le nombran las historias,
soy de parecer y me afirmo que fue de mediana estatura, ancho de espaldas,
algo estevado, moreno de rostro y barbitaheño, velloso en el cuerpo y de
vista amenazadora; corto de razones, pero muy comedido y bien criado.

-Si no fue Roldán más gentilhombre que vuestra merced ha dicho -replicó el
cura-, no fue maravilla que la señora Angélica la Bella le desdeñase y
dejase por la gala, brío y donaire que debía de tener el morillo
barbiponiente a quien ella se entregó; y anduvo discreta de adamar antes la
blandura de Medoro que la aspereza de Roldán.

-Esa Angélica -respondió don Quijote-, señor cura, fue una doncella
destraída, andariega y algo antojadiza, y tan lleno dejó el mundo de sus
impertinencias como de la fama de su hermosura: despreció mil señores, mil
valientes y mil discretos, y contentóse con un pajecillo barbilucio, sin
otra hacienda ni nombre que el que le pudo dar de agradecido la amistad que
guardó a su amigo. El gran cantor de su belleza, el famoso Ariosto, por no
atreverse, o por no querer cantar lo que a esta señora le sucedió después
de su ruin entrego, que no debieron ser cosas demasiadamente honestas, la
dejó donde dijo:

Y como del Catay recibió el cetro,

quizá otro cantará con mejor plectro.

Y, sin duda, que esto fue como profecía; que los poetas también se llaman
vates, que quiere decir adivinos. Véese esta verdad clara, porque, después
acá, un famoso poeta andaluz lloró y cantó sus lágrimas, y otro famoso y
único poeta castellano cantó su hermosura.

-Dígame, señor don Quijote -dijo a esta sazón el barbero-, ¿no ha habido
algún poeta que haya hecho alguna sátira a esa señora Angélica, entre
tantos como la han alabado?

-Bien creo yo -respondió don Quijote- que si Sacripante o Roldán fueran
poetas, que ya me hubieran jabonado a la doncella; porque es propio y
natural de los poetas desdeñados y no admitidos de sus damas fingidas -o
fingidas, en efeto, de aquéllos a quien ellos escogieron por señoras de sus
pensamientos-, vengarse con sátiras y libelos (venganza, por cierto,
indigna de pechos generosos), pero hasta agora no ha llegado a mi noticia
ningún verso infamatorio contra la señora Angélica, que trujo revuelto el
mundo.

-¡Milagro! -dijo el cura.

Y, en esto, oyeron que la ama y la sobrina, que ya habían dejado la
conversación, daban grandes voces en el patio, y acudieron todos al ruido.





Capítulo II. Que trata de la notable pendencia que Sancho Panza tuvo con la
sobrina y ama de don Quijote, con otros sujetos graciosos


Cuenta la historia que las voces que oyeron don Quijote, el cura y el
barbero eran de la sobrina y ama, que las daban diciendo a Sancho Panza,
que pugnaba por entrar a ver a don Quijote, y ellas le defendían la puerta:

-¿Qué quiere este mostrenco en esta casa? Idos a la vuestra, hermano, que
vos sois, y no otro, el que destrae y sonsaca a mi señor, y le lleva por
esos andurriales.

A lo que Sancho respondió:

-Ama de Satanás, el sonsacado, y el destraído, y el llevado por esos
andurriales soy yo, que no tu amo; él me llevó por esos mundos, y vosotras
os engañáis en la mitad del justo precio: él me sacó de mi casa con
engañifas, prometiéndome una ínsula, que hasta agora la espero.

-Malas ínsulas te ahoguen -respondió la sobrina-, Sancho maldito. Y ¿qué
son ínsulas? ¿Es alguna cosa de comer, golosazo, comilón, que tú eres?

-No es de comer -replicó Sancho-, sino de gobernar y regir mejor que cuatro
ciudades y que cuatro alcaldes de corte.

-Con todo eso -dijo el ama-, no entraréis acá, saco de maldades y costal de
malicias. Id a gobernar vuestra casa y a labrar vuestros pegujares, y
dejaos de pretender ínsulas ni ínsulos.

Grande gusto recebían el cura y el barbero de oír el coloquio de los tres;
pero don Quijote, temeroso que Sancho se descosiese y desbuchase algún
montón de maliciosas necedades, y tocase en puntos que no le estarían bien
a su crédito, le llamó, y hizo a las dos que callasen y le dejasen entrar.
Entró Sancho, y el cura y el barbero se despidieron de don Quijote, de cuya
salud desesperaron, viendo cuán puesto estaba en sus desvariados
pensamientos, y cuán embebido en la simplicidad de sus malandantes
caballerías; y así, dijo el cura al barbero:

-Vos veréis, compadre, cómo, cuando menos lo pensemos, nuestro hidalgo sale
otra vez a volar la ribera.

No pongo yo duda en eso -respondió el barbero-, pero no me maravillo tanto
de la locura del caballero como de la simplicidad del escudero, que tan
creído tiene aquello de la ínsula, que creo que no se lo sacarán del casco
cuantos desengaños pueden imaginarse.

-Dios los remedie -dijo el cura-, y estemos a la mira: veremos en lo que
para esta máquina de disparates de tal caballero y de tal escudero, que
parece que los forjaron a los dos en una mesma turquesa, y que las locuras
del señor, sin las necedades del criado, no valían un ardite.

-Así es -dijo el barbero-, y holgara mucho saber qué tratarán ahora los
dos.

-Yo seguro -respondió el cura- que la sobrina o el ama nos lo cuenta
después, que no son de condición que dejarán de escucharlo.

En tanto, don Quijote se encerró con Sancho en su aposento; y, estando
solos, le dijo:

-Mucho me pesa, Sancho, que hayas dicho y digas que yo fui el que te saqué
de tus casillas, sabiendo que yo no me quedé en mis casas: juntos salimos,
juntos fuimos y juntos peregrinamos; una misma fortuna y una misma suerte
ha corrido por los dos: si a ti te mantearon una vez, a mí me han molido
ciento, y esto es lo que te llevo de ventaja.

-Eso estaba puesto en razón -respondió Sancho-, porque, según vuestra
merced dice, más anejas son a los caballeros andantes las desgracias que a
sus escuderos.

-Engáñaste, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-; según aquello, quando caput
dolet..., etcétera.

-No entiendo otra lengua que la mía -respondió Sancho.

-Quiero decir -dijo don Quijote- que, cuando la cabeza duele, todos los
miembros duelen; y así, siendo yo tu amo y señor, soy tu cabeza, y tú mi
parte, pues eres mi criado; y, por esta razón, el mal que a mí me toca, o
tocare, a ti te ha de doler, y a mí el tuyo.

-Así había de ser -dijo Sancho-, pero cuando a mí me manteaban como a
miembro, se estaba mi cabeza detrás de las bardas, mirándome volar por los
aires, sin sentir dolor alguno; y, pues los miembros están obligados a
dolerse del mal de la cabeza, había de estar obligada ella a dolerse
dellos.

-¿Querrás tú decir agora, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que no me dolía
yo cuando a ti te manteaban? Y si lo dices, no lo digas, ni lo pienses;
pues más dolor sentía yo entonces en mi espíritu que tú en tu cuerpo. Pero
dejemos esto aparte por agora, que tiempo habrá donde lo ponderemos y
pongamos en su punto, y dime, Sancho amigo: ¿qué es lo que dicen de mí por
ese lugar? ¿En qué opinión me tiene el vulgo, en qué los hidalgos y en qué
los caballeros? ¿Qué dicen de mi valentía, qué de mis hazañas y qué de mi
cortesía? ¿Qué se platica del asumpto que he tomado de resucitar y volver
al mundo la ya olvidada orden caballeresca? Finalmente, quiero, Sancho, me
digas lo que acerca desto ha llegado a tus oídos; y esto me has de decir
sin añadir al bien ni quitar al mal cosa alguna, que de los vasallos leales
es decir la verdad a sus señores en su ser y figura propia, sin que la
adulación la acreciente o otro vano respeto la disminuya; y quiero que
sepas, Sancho, que si a los oídos de los príncipes llegase la verdad
desnuda, sin los vestidos de la lisonja, otros siglos correrían, otras
edades serían tenidas por más de hierro que la nuestra, que entiendo que,
de las que ahora se usan, es la dorada. Sírvate este advertimiento, Sancho,
para que discreta y bienintencionadamente pongas en mis oídos la verdad de
las cosas que supieres de lo que te he preguntado.

-Eso haré yo de muy buena gana, señor mío -respondió Sancho-, con condición
que vuestra merced no se ha de enojar de lo que dijere, pues quiere que lo
diga en cueros, sin vestirlo de otras ropas de aquellas con que llegaron a
mi noticia.

-En ninguna manera me enojaré -respondió don Quijote-. Bien puedes, Sancho,
hablar libremente y sin rodeo alguno.

-Pues lo primero que digo -dijo-, es que el vulgo tiene a vuestra merced
por grandísimo loco, y a mí por no menos mentecato. Los hidalgos dicen que,
no conteniéndose vuestra merced en los límites de la hidalguía, se ha
puesto don y se ha arremetido a caballero con cuatro cepas y dos yugadas de
tierra y con un trapo atrás y otro adelante. Dicen los caballeros que no
querrían que los hidalgos se opusiesen a ellos, especialmente aquellos
hidalgos escuderiles que dan humo a los zapatos y toman los puntos de las
medias negras con seda verde.

-Eso -dijo don Quijote- no tiene que ver conmigo, pues ando siempre bien
vestido, y jamás remendado; roto, bien podría ser; y el roto, más de las
armas que del tiempo.

-En lo que toca -prosiguió Sancho- a la valentía, cortesía, hazañas y
asumpto de vuestra merced, hay diferentes opiniones; unos dicen: "loco,
pero gracioso"; otros, "valiente, pero desgraciado"; otros, "cortés, pero
impertinente"; y por aquí van discurriendo en tantas cosas, que ni a
vuestra merced ni a mí nos dejan hueso sano.

-Mira, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-: dondequiera que está la virtud en
eminente grado, es perseguida. Pocos o ninguno de los famosos varones que
pasaron dejó de ser calumniado de la malicia. Julio César, animosísimo,
prudentísimo y valentísimo capitán, fue notado de ambicioso y algún tanto
no limpio, ni en sus vestidos ni en sus costumbres. Alejandro, a quien sus
hazañas le alcanzaron el renombre de Magno, dicen dél que tuvo sus ciertos
puntos de borracho. De Hércules, el de los muchos trabajos, se cuenta que
fue lascivo y muelle. De don Galaor, hermano de Amadís de Gaula, se murmura
que fue más que demasiadamente rijoso; y de su hermano, que fue llorón. Así
que, ¡oh Sancho!, entre las tantas calumnias de buenos, bien pueden pasar
las mías, como no sean más de las que has dicho.

-¡Ahí está el toque, cuerpo de mi padre! -replicó Sancho.

-Pues, ¿hay más? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Aún la cola falta por desollar -dijo Sancho-. Lo de hasta aquí son tortas
y pan pintado; mas si vuestra merced quiere saber todo lo que hay acerca de
las caloñas que le ponen, yo le traeré aquí luego al momento quien se las
diga todas, sin que les falte una meaja; que anoche llegó el hijo de
Bartolomé Carrasco, que viene de estudiar de Salamanca, hecho bachiller, y,
yéndole yo a dar la bienvenida, me dijo que andaba ya en libros la historia
de vuestra merced, con nombre del Ingenioso Hidalgo don Quijote de la
Mancha; y dice que me mientan a mí en ella con mi mesmo nombre de Sancho
Panza, y a la señora Dulcinea del Toboso, con otras cosas que pasamos
nosotros a solas, que me hice cruces de espantado cómo las pudo saber el
historiador que las escribió.

-Yo te aseguro, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que debe de ser algún sabio
encantador el autor de nuestra historia; que a los tales no se les encubre
nada de lo que quieren escribir.

-Y ¡cómo -dijo Sancho- si era sabio y encantador, pues (según dice el
bachiller Sansón Carrasco, que así se llama el que dicho tengo) que el
autor de la historia se llama Cide Hamete Berenjena!

-Ese nombre es de moro -respondió don Quijote.

-Así será -respondió Sancho-, porque por la mayor parte he oído decir que
los moros son amigos de berenjenas.

-Tú debes, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, errarte en el sobrenombre de ese
Cide, que en arábigo quiere decir señor.

-Bien podría ser -replicó Sancho-, mas, si vuestra merced gusta que yo le
haga venir aquí, iré por él en volandas.

-Harásme mucho placer, amigo -dijo don Quijote-, que me tiene suspenso lo
que me has dicho, y no comeré bocado que bien me sepa hasta ser informado
de todo.

-Pues yo voy por él -respondió Sancho.

Y, dejando a su señor, se fue a buscar al bachiller, con el cual volvió de
allí a poco espacio, y entre los tres pasaron un graciosísimo coloquio.





Capítulo III. Del ridículo razonamiento que pasó entre don Quijote, Sancho
Panza y el bachiller Sansón Carrasco


Pensativo además quedó don Quijote, esperando al bachiller Carrasco, de
quien esperaba oír las nuevas de sí mismo puestas en libro, como había
dicho Sancho; y no se podía persuadir a que tal historia hubiese, pues aún
no estaba enjuta en la cuchilla de su espada la sangre de los enemigos que
había muerto, y ya querían que anduviesen en estampa sus altas caballerías.
Con todo eso, imaginó que algún sabio, o ya amigo o enemigo, por arte de
encantamento las habrá dado a la estampa: si amigo, para engrandecerlas y
levantarlas sobre las más señaladas de caballero andante; si enemigo, para
aniquilarlas y ponerlas debajo de las más viles que de algún vil escudero
se hubiesen escrito, puesto -decía entre sí- que nunca hazañas de escuderos
se escribieron; y cuando fuese verdad que la tal historia hubiese, siendo
de caballero andante, por fuerza había de ser grandílocua, alta, insigne,
magnífica y verdadera.

Con esto se consoló algún tanto, pero desconsolóle pensar que su autor era
moro, según aquel nombre de Cide; y de los moros no se podía esperar verdad
alguna, porque todos son embelecadores, falsarios y quimeristas. Temíase no
hubiese tratado sus amores con alguna indecencia, que redundase en
menoscabo y perjuicio de la honestidad de su señora Dulcinea del Toboso;
deseaba que hubiese declarado su fidelidad y el decoro que siempre la había
guardado, menospreciando reinas, emperatrices y doncellas de todas
calidades, teniendo a raya los ímpetus de los naturales movimientos; y así,
envuelto y revuelto en estas y otras muchas imaginaciones, le hallaron
Sancho y Carrasco, a quien don Quijote recibió con mucha cortesía.

Era el bachiller, aunque se llamaba Sansón, no muy grande de cuerpo, aunque
muy gran socarrón, de color macilenta, pero de muy buen entendimiento;
tendría hasta veinte y cuatro años, carirredondo, de nariz chata y de
boca grande, señales todas de ser de condición maliciosa y amigo de
donaires y de burlas, como lo mostró en viendo a don Quijote, poniéndose
delante dél de rodillas, diciéndole:

-Déme vuestra grandeza las manos, señor don Quijote de la Mancha; que, por
el hábito de San Pedro que visto, aunque no tengo otras órdenes que las
cuatro primeras, que es vuestra merced uno de los más famosos caballeros
andantes que ha habido, ni aun habrá, en toda la redondez de la tierra.
Bien haya Cide Hamete Benengeli, que la historia de vuestras grandezas dejó
escritas, y rebién haya el curioso que tuvo cuidado de hacerlas traducir de
arábigo en nuestro vulgar castellano, para universal entretenimiento de las
gentes.

Hízole levantar don Quijote, y dijo:

-Desa manera, ¿verdad es que hay historia mía, y que fue moro y sabio el
que la compuso?

-Es tan verdad, señor -dijo Sansón-, que tengo para mí que el día de hoy
están impresos más de doce mil libros de la tal historia; si no, dígalo
Portugal, Barcelona y Valencia, donde se han impreso; y aun hay fama que se
está imprimiendo en Amberes, y a mí se me trasluce que no ha de haber
nación ni lengua donde no se traduzga.

-Una de las cosas -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote- que más debe de dar
contento a un hombre virtuoso y eminente es verse, viviendo, andar con buen
nombre por las lenguas de las gentes, impreso y en estampa. Dije con buen
nombre porque, siendo al contrario, ninguna muerte se le igualará.

-Si por buena fama y si por buen nombre va -dijo el bachiller-, solo
vuestra merced lleva la palma a todos los caballeros andantes; porque el
moro en su lengua y el cristiano en la suya tuvieron cuidado de pintarnos
muy al vivo la gallardía de vuestra merced, el ánimo grande en acometer los
peligros, la paciencia en las adversidades y el sufrimiento, así en las
desgracias como en las heridas, la honestidad y continencia en los amores
tan platónicos de vuestra merced y de mi señora doña Dulcinea del Toboso.

-Nunca -dijo a este punto Sancho Panza- he oído llamar con don a mi señora
Dulcinea, sino solamente la señora Dulcinea del Toboso, y ya en esto anda
errada la historia.

-No es objeción de importancia ésa -respondió Carrasco.

-No, por cierto -respondió don Quijote-; pero dígame vuestra merced, señor
bachiller: ¿qué hazañas mías son las que más se ponderan en esa historia?

-En eso -respondió el bachiller-, hay diferentes opiniones, como hay
diferentes gustos: unos se atienen a la aventura de los molinos de viento,
que a vuestra merced le parecieron Briareos y gigantes; otros, a la de los
batanes; éste, a la descripción de los dos ejércitos, que después
parecieron ser dos manadas de carneros; aquél encarece la del muerto que
llevaban a enterrar a Segovia; uno dice que a todas se aventaja la de la
libertad de los galeotes; otro, que ninguna iguala a la de los dos gigantes
benitos, con la pendencia del valeroso vizcaíno.

-Dígame, señor bachiller -dijo a esta sazón Sancho-: ¿entra ahí la aventura
de los yangüeses, cuando a nuestro buen Rocinante se le antojó pedir
cotufas en el golfo?

-No se le quedó nada -respondió Sansón- al sabio en el tintero: todo lo
dice y todo lo apunta, hasta lo de las cabriolas que el buen Sancho hizo en
la manta.

-En la manta no hice yo cabriolas -respondió Sancho-; en el aire sí, y aun
más de las que yo quisiera.

-A lo que yo imagino -dijo don Quijote-, no hay historia humana en el mundo
que no tenga sus altibajos, especialmente las que tratan de caballerías,
las cuales nunca pueden estar llenas de prósperos sucesos.

-Con todo eso -respondió el bachiller-, dicen algunos que han leído la
historia que se holgaran se les hubiera olvidado a los autores della
algunos de los infinitos palos que en diferentes encuentros dieron al señor
don Quijote.

-Ahí entra la verdad de la historia -dijo Sancho.

-También pudieran callarlos por equidad -dijo don Quijote-, pues las
acciones que ni mudan ni alteran la verdad de la historia no hay para qué
escribirlas, si han de redundar en menosprecio del señor de la historia. A
fee que no fue tan piadoso Eneas como Virgilio le pinta, ni tan prudente
Ulises como le describe Homero.

-Así es -replicó Sansón-, pero uno es escribir como poeta y otro como
historiador: el poeta puede contar, o cantar las cosas, no como fueron,
sino como debían ser; y el historiador las ha de escribir, no como debían
ser, sino como fueron, sin añadir ni quitar a la verdad cosa alguna.

-Pues si es que se anda a decir verdades ese señor moro -dijo Sancho-, a
buen seguro que entre los palos de mi señor se hallen los míos; porque
nunca a su merced le tomaron la medida de las espaldas que no me la tomasen
a mí de todo el cuerpo; pero no hay de qué maravillarme, pues, como dice el
mismo señor mío, del dolor de la cabeza han de participar los miembros.

-Socarrón sois, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-. A fee que no os falta
memoria cuando vos queréis tenerla.

-Cuando yo quisiese olvidarme de los garrotazos que me han dado -dijo
Sancho-, no lo consentirán los cardenales, que aún se están frescos en las
costillas.

-Callad, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, y no interrumpáis al señor bachiller, a
quien suplico pase adelante en decirme lo que se dice de mí en la referida
historia.

-Y de mí -dijo Sancho-, que también dicen que soy yo uno de los principales
presonajes della.

-Personajes que no presonajes, Sancho amigo -dijo Sansón.

-¿Otro reprochador de voquibles tenemos? -dijo Sancho-. Pues ándense a eso,
y no acabaremos en toda la vida.

-Mala me la dé Dios, Sancho -respondió el bachiller-, si no sois vos la
segunda persona de la historia; y que hay tal, que precia más oíros hablar
a vos que al más pintado de toda ella, puesto que también hay quien diga
que anduvistes demasiadamente de crédulo en creer que podía ser verdad el
gobierno de aquella ínsula, ofrecida por el señor don Quijote, que está
presente.

-Aún hay sol en las bardas -dijo don Quijote-, y, mientras más fuere
entrando en edad Sancho, con la esperiencia que dan los años, estará más
idóneo y más hábil para ser gobernador que no está agora.

-Por Dios, señor -dijo Sancho-, la isla que yo no gobernase con los años
que tengo, no la gobernaré con los años de Matusalén. El daño está en que
la dicha ínsula se entretiene, no sé dónde, y no en faltarme a mí el
caletre para gobernarla.

-Encomendadlo a Dios, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que todo se hará bien, y
quizá mejor de lo que vos pensáis; que no se mueve la hoja en el árbol sin
la voluntad de Dios.

-Así es verdad -dijo Sansón-, que si Dios quiere, no le faltarán a Sancho
mil islas que gobernar, cuanto más una.

-Gobernador he visto por ahí -dijo Sancho- que, a mi parecer, no llegan a
la suela de mi zapato, y, con todo eso, los llaman señoría, y se sirven con
plata.

-Ésos no son gobernadores de ínsulas -replicó Sansón-, sino de otros
gobiernos más manuales; que los que gobiernan ínsulas, por lo menos han de
saber gramática.

-Con la grama bien me avendría yo -dijo Sancho-, pero con la tica, ni me
tiro ni me pago, porque no la entiendo. Pero, dejando esto del gobierno en
las manos de Dios, que me eche a las partes donde más de mí se sirva, digo,
señor bachiller Sansón Carrasco, que infinitamente me ha dado gusto que el
autor de la historia haya hablado de mí de manera que no enfadan las cosas
que de mí se cuentan; que a fe de buen escudero que si hubiera dicho de mí
cosas que no fueran muy de cristiano viejo, como soy, que nos habían de oír
los sordos.

-Eso fuera hacer milagros -respondió Sansón.

-Milagros o no milagros -dijo Sancho-, cada uno mire cómo habla o cómo
escribe de las presonas, y no ponga a troche moche lo primero que le viene
al magín.

-Una de las tachas que ponen a la tal historia -dijo el bachiller- es que
su autor puso en ella una novela intitulada El curioso impertinente; no por
mala ni por mal razonada, sino por no ser de aquel lugar, ni tiene que ver
con la historia de su merced del señor don Quijote.

-Yo apostaré -replicó Sancho- que ha mezclado el hideperro berzas con
capachos.

-Ahora digo -dijo don Quijote- que no ha sido sabio el autor de mi
historia, sino algún ignorante hablador, que, a tiento y sin algún
discurso, se puso a escribirla, salga lo que saliere, como hacía Orbaneja,
el pintor de Úbeda, al cual preguntándole qué pintaba, respondió: ''Lo que
saliere''. Tal vez pintaba un gallo, de tal suerte y tan mal parecido, que
era menester que con letras góticas escribiese junto a él: "Éste es gallo".
Y así debe de ser de mi historia, que tendrá necesidad de comento para
entenderla.

-Eso no -respondió Sansón-, porque es tan clara, que no hay cosa que
dificultar en ella: los niños la manosean, los mozos la leen, los hombres
la entienden y los viejos la celebran; y, finalmente, es tan trillada y tan
leída y tan sabida de todo género de gentes, que, apenas han visto algún
rocín flaco, cuando dicen: "allí va Rocinante". Y los que más se han dado a
su letura son los pajes: no hay antecámara de señor donde no se halle un
Don Quijote: unos le toman si otros le dejan; éstos le embisten y aquéllos
le piden. Finalmente, la tal historia es del más gustoso y menos
perjudicial entretenimiento que hasta agora se haya visto, porque en toda
ella no se descubre, ni por semejas, una palabra deshonesta ni un
pensamiento menos que católico.

-A escribir de otra suerte -dijo don Quijote-, no fuera escribir verdades,
sino mentiras; y los historiadores que de mentiras se valen habían de ser
quemados, como los que hacen moneda falsa; y no sé yo qué le movió al autor
a valerse de novelas y cuentos ajenos, habiendo tanto que escribir en los
míos: sin duda se debió de atener al refrán: "De paja y de heno...",
etcétera. Pues en verdad que en sólo manifestar mis pensamientos, mis
sospiros, mis lágrimas, mis buenos deseos y mis acometimientos pudiera
hacer un volumen mayor, o tan grande que el que pueden hacer todas las
obras del Tostado. En efeto, lo que yo alcanzo, señor bachiller, es que
para componer historias y libros, de cualquier suerte que sean, es menester
un gran juicio y un maduro entendimiento. Decir gracias y escribir donaires
es de grandes ingenios: la más discreta figura de la comedia es la del
bobo, porque no lo ha de ser el que quiere dar a entender que es simple. La
historia es como cosa sagrada; porque ha de ser verdadera, y donde está la
verdad está Dios, en cuanto a verdad; pero, no obstante esto, hay algunos
que así componen y arrojan libros de sí como si fuesen buñuelos.

-No hay libro tan malo -dijo el bachiller- que no tenga algo bueno.

-No hay duda en eso -replicó don Quijote-; pero muchas veces acontece que
los que tenían méritamente granjeada y alcanzada gran fama por sus
escritos, en dándolos a la estampa, la perdieron del todo, o la
menoscabaron en algo.

-La causa deso es -dijo Sansón- que, como las obras impresas se miran
despacio, fácilmente se veen sus faltas, y tanto más se escudriñan cuanto
es mayor la fama del que las compuso. Los hombres famosos por sus ingenios,
los grandes poetas, los ilustres historiadores, siempre, o las más veces,
son envidiados de aquellos que tienen por gusto y por particular
entretenimiento juzgar los escritos ajenos, sin haber dado algunos propios
a la luz del mundo.

-Eso no es de maravillar -dijo don Quijote-, porque muchos teólogos hay que
no son buenos para el púlpito, y son bonísimos para conocer las faltas o
sobras de los que predican.

-Todo eso es así, señor don Quijote -dijo Carrasco-, pero quisiera yo que
los tales censuradores fueran más misericordiosos y menos escrupulosos, sin
atenerse a los átomos del sol clarísimo de la obra de que murmuran; que si
aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, consideren lo mucho que estuvo despierto,
por dar la luz de su obra con la menos sombra que pudiese; y quizá podría
ser que lo que a ellos les parece mal fuesen lunares, que a las veces
acrecientan la hermosura del rostro que los tiene; y así, digo que es
grandísimo el riesgo a que se pone el que imprime un libro, siendo de toda
imposibilidad imposible componerle tal, que satisfaga y contente a todos
los que le leyeren.

-El que de mí trata -dijo don Quijote-, a pocos habrá contentado.

-Antes es al revés; que, como de stultorum infinitus est numerus, infinitos
son los que han gustado de la tal historia; y algunos han puesto falta y
dolo en la memoria del autor, pues se le olvida de contar quién fue el
ladrón que hurtó el rucio a Sancho, que allí no se declara, y sólo se
infiere de lo escrito que se le hurtaron, y de allí a poco le vemos a
caballo sobre el mesmo jumento, sin haber parecido. También dicen que se le
olvidó poner lo que Sancho hizo de aquellos cien escudos que halló en la
maleta en Sierra Morena, que nunca más los nombra, y hay muchos que desean
saber qué hizo dellos, o en qué los gastó, que es uno de los puntos
sustanciales que faltan en la obra.

-Sancho respondió:

-Yo, señor Sansón, no estoy ahora para ponerme en cuentas ni cuentos; que
me ha tomado un desmayo de estómago, que si no le reparo con dos tragos de
lo añejo, me pondrá en la espina de Santa Lucía. En casa lo tengo, mi oíslo
me aguarda; en acabando de comer, daré la vuelta, y satisfaré a vuestra
merced y a todo el mundo de lo que preguntar quisieren, así de la pérdida
del jumento como del gasto de los cien escudos.

Y, sin esperar respuesta ni decir otra palabra, se fue a su casa.

Don Quijote pidió y rogó al bachiller se quedase a hacer penitencia con él.
Tuvo el bachiller el envite: quedóse, añadióse al ordinaro un par de
pichones, tratóse en la mesa de caballerías, siguióle el humor Carrasco,
acabóse el banquete, durmieron la siesta, volvió Sancho y renovóse la
plática pasada.





Capítulo IV. Donde Sancho Panza satisface al bachiller Sansón Carrasco de
sus dudas y preguntas, con otros sucesos dignos de saberse y de contarse


Volvió Sancho a casa de don Quijote, y, volviendo al pasado razonamiento,
dijo:

-A lo que el señor Sansón dijo que se deseaba saber quién, o cómo, o cuándo
se me hurtó el jumento, respondiendo digo que la noche misma que, huyendo
de la Santa Hermandad, nos entramos en Sierra Morena, después de la
aventura sin ventura de los galeotes y de la del difunto que llevaban a
Segovia, mi señor y yo nos metimos entre una espesura, adonde mi señor
arrimado a su lanza, y yo sobre mi rucio, molidos y cansados de las pasadas
refriegas, nos pusimos a dormir como si fuera sobre cuatro colchones de
pluma; especialmente yo dormí con tan pesado sueño, que quienquiera que fue
tuvo lugar de llegar y suspenderme sobre cuatro estacas que puso a los
cuatro lados de la albarda, de manera que me dejó a caballo sobre ella, y
me sacó debajo de mí al rucio, sin que yo lo sintiese.

-Eso es cosa fácil, y no acontecimiento nuevo, que lo mesmo le sucedió a
Sacripante cuando, estando en el cerco de Albraca, con esa misma invención
le sacó el caballo de entre las piernas aquel famoso ladrón llamado
Brunelo.

-Amaneció -prosiguió Sancho-, y, apenas me hube estremecido, cuando,
faltando las estacas, di conmigo en el suelo una gran caída; miré por el
jumento, y no le vi; acudiéronme lágrimas a los ojos, y hice una
lamentación, que si no la puso el autor de nuestra historia, puede hacer
cuenta que no puso cosa buena. Al cabo de no sé cuántos días, viniendo con
la señora princesa Micomicona, conocí mi asno, y que venía sobre él en
hábito de gitano aquel Ginés de Pasamonte, aquel embustero y grandísimo
maleador que quitamos mi señor y yo de la cadena.

-No está en eso el yerro -replicó Sansón-, sino en que, antes de haber
parecido el jumento, dice el autor que iba a caballo Sancho en el mesmo
rucio.

-A eso -dijo Sancho-, no sé qué responder, sino que el historiador se
engañó, o ya sería descuido del impresor.

-Así es, sin duda -dijo Sansón-; pero, ¿qué se hicieron los cien escudos?;
¿deshiciéronse?

Respondió Sancho:

-Yo los gasté en pro de mi persona y de la de mi mujer, y de mis hijos, y
ellos han sido causa de que mi mujer lleve en paciencia los caminos y
carreras que he andado sirviendo a mi señor don Quijote; que si, al cabo de
tanto tiempo, volviera sin blanca y sin el jumento a mi casa, negra ventura
me esperaba; y si hay más que saber de mí, aquí estoy, que responderé al
mismo rey en presona, y nadie tiene para qué meterse en si truje o no
truje, si gasté o no gasté; que si los palos que me dieron en estos viajes
se hubieran de pagar a dinero, aunque no se tasaran sino a cuatro maravedís
cada uno, en otros cien escudos no había para pagarme la mitad; y cada uno
meta la mano en su pecho, y no se ponga a juzgar lo blanco por negro y lo
negro por blanco; que cada uno es como Dios le hizo, y aun peor muchas
veces.

-Yo tendré cuidado -dijo Carrasco- de acusar al autor de la historia que si
otra vez la imprimiere, no se le olvide esto que el buen Sancho ha dicho,
que será realzarla un buen coto más de lo que ella se está.

-¿Hay otra cosa que enmendar en esa leyenda, señor bachiller? -preguntó don
Quijote.

-Sí debe de haber -respondió él-, pero ninguna debe de ser de la
importancia de las ya referidas.

-Y por ventura -dijo don Quijote-, ¿promete el autor segunda parte?

-Sí promete -respondió Sansón-, pero dice que no ha hallado ni sabe quién
la tiene, y así, estamos en duda si saldrá o no; y así por esto como porque
algunos dicen: "Nunca segundas partes fueron buenas", y otros: "De las
cosas de don Quijote bastan las escritas", se duda que no ha de haber
segunda parte; aunque algunos que son más joviales que saturninos dicen:
"Vengan más quijotadas: embista don Quijote y hable Sancho Panza, y sea lo
que fuere, que con eso nos contentamos".

-Y ¿a qué se atiene el autor?

-A que -respondió Sansón-, en hallando que halle la historia, que él va
buscando con extraordinarias diligencias, la dará luego a la estampa,
llevado más del interés que de darla se le sigue que de otra alabanza
alguna.

A lo que dijo Sancho:

-¿Al dinero y al interés mira el autor? Maravilla será que acierte, porque
no hará sino harbar, harbar, como sastre en vísperas de pascuas, y las
obras que se hacen apriesa nunca se acaban con la perfeción que requieren.
Atienda ese señor moro, o lo que es, a mirar lo que hace; que yo y mi señor
le daremos tanto ripio a la mano en materia de aventuras y de sucesos
diferentes, que pueda componer no sólo segunda parte, sino ciento. Debe de
pensar el buen hombre, sin duda, que nos dormimos aquí en las pajas; pues
ténganos el pie al herrar, y verá del que cosqueamos. Lo que yo sé decir es
que si mi señor tomase mi consejo, ya habíamos de estar en esas campañas
deshaciendo agravios y enderezando tuertos, como es uso y costumbre de los
buenos andantes caballeros.

No había bien acabado de decir estas razones Sancho, cuando llegaron a sus
oídos relinchos de Rocinante; los cuales relinchos tomó don Quijote por
felicísimo agüero, y determinó de hacer de allí a tres o cuatro días otra
salida; y, declarando su intento al bachiller, le pidió consejo por qué
parte comenzaría su jornada; el cual le respondió que era su parecer que
fuese al reino de Aragón y a la ciudad de Zaragoza, adonde, de allí a pocos
días, se habían de hacer unas solenísimas justas por la fiesta de San
Jorge, en las cuales podría ganar fama sobre todos los caballeros
aragoneses, que sería ganarla sobre todos los del mundo. Alabóle ser
honradísima y valentísima su determinación, y advirtióle que anduviese más
atentado en acometer los peligros, a causa que su vida no era suya, sino de
todos aquellos que le habían de menester para que los amparase y socorriese
en sus desventuras.

-Deso es lo que yo reniego, señor Sansón -dijo a este punto Sancho-, que
así acomete mi señor a cien hombres armados como un muchacho goloso a media
docena de badeas. ¡Cuerpo del mundo, señor bachiller! Sí, que tiempos hay
de acometer y tiempos de retirar; sí, no ha de ser todo "¡Santiago, y
cierra, España!" Y más, que yo he oído decir, y creo que a mi señor mismo,
si mal no me acuerdo, que en los estremos de cobarde y de temerario está el
medio de la valentía; y si esto es así, no quiero que huya sin tener para
qué, ni que acometa cuando la demasía pide otra cosa. Pero, sobre todo,
aviso a mi señor que si me ha de llevar consigo, ha de ser con condición
que él se lo ha de batallar todo, y que yo no he de estar obligado a otra
cosa que a mirar por su persona en lo que tocare a su limpieza y a su
regalo; que en esto yo le bailaré el agua delante; pero pensar que tengo de
poner mano a la espada, aunque sea contra villanos malandrines de hacha y
capellina, es pensar en lo escusado. Yo, señor Sansón, no pienso granjear
fama de valiente, sino del mejor y más leal escudero que jamás sirvió a
caballero andante; y si mi señor don Quijote, obligado de mis muchos y
buenos servicios, quisiere darme alguna ínsula de las muchas que su merced
dice que se ha de topar por ahí, recibiré mucha merced en ello; y cuando no
me la diere, nacido soy, y no ha de vivir el hombre en hoto de otro sino de
Dios; y más, que tan bien, y aun quizá mejor, me sabrá el pan desgobernado
que siendo gobernador; y ¿sé yo por ventura si en esos gobiernos me tiene
aparejada el diablo alguna zancadilla donde tropiece y caiga y me haga las
muelas? Sancho nací, y Sancho pienso morir; pero si con todo esto, de
buenas a buenas, sin mucha solicitud y sin mucho riesgo, me deparase el
cielo alguna ínsula, o otra cosa semejante, no soy tan necio que la
desechase; que también se dice: "Cuando te dieren la vaquilla, corre con la
soguilla"; y "Cuando viene el bien, mételo en tu casa".

-Vos, hermano Sancho -dijo Carrasco-, habéis hablado como un catedrático;
pero, con todo eso, confiad en Dios y en el señor don Quijote, que os ha de
dar un reino, no que una ínsula.

-Tanto es lo de más como lo de menos -respondió Sancho-; aunque sé decir al
señor Carrasco que no echara mi señor el reino que me diera en saco roto,
que yo he tomado el pulso a mí mismo, y me hallo con salud para regir
reinos y gobernar ínsulas, y esto ya otras veces lo he dicho a mi señor.

-Mirad, Sancho -dijo Sansón-, que los oficios mudan las costumbres, y
podría ser que viéndoos gobernador no conociésedes a la madre que os parió.

-Eso allá se ha de entender -respondió Sancho- con los que nacieron en las
malvas, y no con los que tienen sobre el alma cuatro dedos de enjundia de
cristianos viejos, como yo los tengo. ¡No, sino llegaos a mi condición, que
sabrá usar de desagradecimiento con alguno!

-Dios lo haga -dijo don Quijote-, y ello dirá cuando el gobierno venga; que
ya me parece que le trayo entre los ojos.

Dicho esto, rogó al bachiller que, si era poeta, le hiciese merced de
componerle unos versos que tratasen de la despedida que pensaba hacer de su
señora Dulcinea del Toboso, y que advirtiese que en el principio de cada
verso había de poner una letra de su nombre, de manera que al fin de los
versos, juntando las primeras letras, se leyese: Dulcinea del Toboso.

El bachiller respondió que, puesto que él no era de los famosos poetas que
había en España, que decían que no eran sino tres y medio, que no dejaría
de componer los tales metros, aunque hallaba una dificultad grande en su
composición, a causa que las letras que contenían el nombre eran diez y
siete; y que si hacía cuatro castellanas de a cuatro versos, sobrara una
letra; y si de a cinco, a quien llaman décimas o redondillas, faltaban tres
letras; pero, con todo eso, procuraría embeber una letra lo mejor que
pudiese, de manera que en las cuatro castellanas se incluyese el nombre de
Dulcinea del Toboso.

-Ha de ser así en todo caso -dijo don Quijote-; que si allí no va el nombre
patente y de manifiesto, no hay mujer que crea que para ella se hicieron
los metros.

Quedaron en esto y en que la partida sería de allí a ocho días. Encargó don
Quijote al bachiller la tuviese secreta, especialmente al cura y a maese
Nicolás, y a su sobrina y al ama, porque no estorbasen su honrada y
valerosa determinación. Todo lo prometió Carrasco. Con esto se despidió,
encargando a don Quijote que de todos sus buenos o malos sucesos le
avisase, habiendo comodidad; y así, se despidieron, y Sancho fue a poner en
orden lo necesario para su jornada.





Capítulo V. De la discreta y graciosa plática que pasó entre Sancho Panza y
su mujer Teresa Panza, y otros sucesos dignos de felice recordación


(Llegando a escribir el traductor desta historia este quinto capítulo, dice
que le tiene por apócrifo, porque en él habla Sancho Panza con otro estilo
del que se podía prometer de su corto ingenio, y dice cosas tan sutiles,
que no tiene por posible que él las supiese; pero que no quiso dejar de
traducirlo, por cumplir con lo que a su oficio debía; y así, prosiguió
diciendo:)

Llegó Sancho a su casa tan regocijado y alegre, que su mujer conoció su
alegría a tiro de ballesta; tanto, que la obligó a preguntarle:

-¿Qué traés, Sancho amigo, que tan alegre venís?

A lo que él respondió:

-Mujer mía, si Dios quisiera, bien me holgara yo de no estar tan contento
como muestro.

-No os entiendo, marido -replicó ella-, y no sé qué queréis decir en eso de
que os holgáredes, si Dios quisiera, de no estar contento; que, maguer
tonta, no sé yo quién recibe gusto de no tenerle.

-Mirad, Teresa -respondió Sancho-: yo estoy alegre porque tengo determinado
de volver a servir a mi amo don Quijote, el cual quiere la vez tercera
salir a buscar las aventuras; y yo vuelvo a salir con él, porque lo quiere
así mi necesidad, junto con la esperanza, que me alegra, de pensar si podré
hallar otros cien escudos como los ya gastados, puesto que me entristece el
haberme de apartar de ti y de mis hijos; y si Dios quisiera darme de comer
a pie enjuto y en mi casa, sin traerme por vericuetos y encrucijadas, pues
lo podía hacer a poca costa y no más de quererlo, claro está que mi alegría
fuera más firme y valedera, pues que la que tengo va mezclada con la
tristeza del dejarte; así que, dije bien que holgara, si Dios quisiera, de
no estar contento.

-Mirad, Sancho -replicó Teresa-: después que os hicistes miembro de
caballero andante habláis de tan rodeada manera, que no hay quien os
entienda.

-Basta que me entienda Dios, mujer -respondió Sancho-, que Él es el
entendedor de todas las cosas, y quédese esto aquí; y advertid, hermana,
que os conviene tener cuenta estos tres días con el rucio, de manera que
esté para armas tomar: dobladle los piensos, requerid la albarda y las
demás jarcias, porque no vamos a bodas, sino a rodear el mundo, y a tener
dares y tomares con gigantes, con endriagos y con vestiglos, y a oír
silbos, rugidos, bramidos y baladros; y aun todo esto fuera flores de
cantueso si no tuviéramos que entender con yangüeses y con moros
encantados.

-Bien creo yo, marido -replicó Teresa-, que los escuderos andantes no comen
el pan de balde; y así, quedaré rogando a Nuestro Señor os saque presto de
tanta mala ventura.

-Yo os digo, mujer -respondió Sancho-, que si no pensase antes de mucho
tiempo verme gobernador de una ínsula, aquí me caería muerto.

-Eso no, marido mío -dijo Teresa-: viva la gallina, aunque sea con su
pepita; vivid vos, y llévese el diablo cuantos gobiernos hay en el mundo;
sin gobierno salistes del vientre de vuestra madre, sin gobierno habéis
vivido hasta ahora, y sin gobierno os iréis, o os llevarán, a la sepultura
cuando Dios fuere servido. Como ésos hay en el mundo que viven sin
gobierno, y no por eso dejan de vivir y de ser contados en el número de las
gentes. La mejor salsa del mundo es la hambre; y como ésta no falta a los
pobres, siempre comen con gusto. Pero mirad, Sancho: si por ventura os
viéredes con algún gobierno, no os olvidéis de mí y de vuestros hijos.
Advertid que Sanchico tiene ya quince años cabales, y es razón que vaya a
la escuela, si es que su tío el abad le ha de dejar hecho de la Iglesia.
Mirad también que Mari Sancha, vuestra hija, no se morirá si la casamos;
que me va dando barruntos que desea tanto tener marido como vos deseáis
veros con gobierno; y, en fin en fin, mejor parece la hija mal casada que
bien abarraganada.

-A buena fe -respondió Sancho- que si Dios me llega a tener algo qué de
gobierno, que tengo de casar, mujer mía, a Mari Sancha tan altamente que no
la alcancen sino con llamarla señora.

-Eso no, Sancho -respondió Teresa-: casadla con su igual, que es lo más
acertado; que si de los zuecos la sacáis a chapines, y de saya parda de
catorceno a verdugado y saboyanas de seda, y de una Marica y un tú a una
doña tal y señoría, no se ha de hallar la mochacha, y a cada paso ha de
caer en mil faltas, descubriendo la hilaza de su tela basta y grosera.

-Calla, boba -dijo Sancho-, que todo será usarlo dos o tres años; que
después le vendrá el señorío y la gravedad como de molde; y cuando no, ¿qué
importa? Séase ella señoría, y venga lo que viniere.

-Medíos, Sancho, con vuestro estado -respondió Teresa-; no os queráis alzar
a mayores, y advertid al refrán que dice: "Al hijo de tu vecino, límpiale
las narices y métele en tu casa". ¡Por cierto, que sería gentil cosa casar
a nuestra María con un condazo, o con caballerote que, cuando se le
antojase, la pusiese como nueva, llamándola de villana, hija del
destripaterrones y de la pelarruecas! ¡No en mis días, marido! ¡Para eso,
por cierto, he criado yo a mi hija! Traed vos dineros, Sancho, y el casarla
dejadlo a mi cargo; que ahí está Lope Tocho, el hijo de Juan Tocho, mozo
rollizo y sano, y que le conocemos, y sé que no mira de mal ojo a la
mochacha; y con éste, que es nuestro igual, estará bien casada, y le
tendremos siempre a nuestros ojos, y seremos todos unos, padres y hijos,
nietos y yernos, y andará la paz y la bendición de Dios entre todos
nosotros; y no casármela vos ahora en esas cortes y en esos palacios
grandes, adonde ni a ella la entiendan, ni ella se entienda.

-Ven acá, bestia y mujer de Barrabás -replicó Sancho-: ¿por qué quieres tú
ahora, sin qué ni para qué, estorbarme que no case a mi hija con quien me
dé nietos que se llamen señoría? Mira, Teresa: siempre he oído decir a mis
mayores que el que no sabe gozar de la ventura cuando le viene, que no se
debe quejar si se le pasa. Y no sería bien que ahora, que está llamando a
nuestra puerta, se la cerremos; dejémonos llevar deste viento favorable que
nos sopla.

(Por este modo de hablar, y por lo que más abajo dice Sancho, dijo el
tradutor desta historia que tenía por apócrifo este capítulo.)

-¿No te parece, animalia -prosiguió Sancho-, que será bien dar con mi
cuerpo en algún gobierno provechoso que nos saque el pie del lodo? Y cásese
a Mari Sancha con quien yo quisiere, y verás cómo te llaman a ti doña
Teresa Panza, y te sientas en la iglesia sobre alcatifa, almohadas y
arambeles, a pesar y despecho de las hidalgas del pueblo. ¡No, sino estaos
siempre en un ser, sin crecer ni menguar, como figura de paramento! Y en
esto no hablemos más, que Sanchica ha de ser condesa, aunque tú más me
digas.

-¿Veis cuanto decís, marido? -respondió Teresa-. Pues, con todo eso, temo
que este condado de mi hija ha de ser su perdición. Vos haced lo que
quisiéredes, ora la hagáis duquesa o princesa, pero séos decir que no será
ello con voluntad ni consentimiento mío. Siempre, hermano, fui amiga de la
igualdad, y no puedo ver entonos sin fundamentos. Teresa me pusieron en el
bautismo, nombre mondo y escueto, sin añadiduras ni cortapisas, ni
arrequives de dones ni donas; Cascajo se llamó mi padre, y a mí, por ser
vuestra mujer, me llaman Teresa Panza, que a buena razón me habían de
llamar Teresa Cascajo. Pero allá van reyes do quieren leyes, y con este
nombre me contento, sin que me le pongan un don encima, que pese tanto que
no le pueda llevar, y no quiero dar que decir a los que me vieren andar
vestida a lo condesil o a lo de gobernadora, que luego dirán: ''¡Mirad qué
entonada va la pazpuerca!; ayer no se hartaba de estirar de un copo de
estopa, y iba a misa cubierta la cabeza con la falda de la saya, en lugar
de manto, y ya hoy va con verdugado, con broches y con entono, como si no
la conociésemos''. Si Dios me guarda mis siete, o mis cinco sentidos, o los
que tengo, no pienso dar ocasión de verme en tal aprieto. Vos, hermano,
idos a ser gobierno o ínsulo, y entonaos a vuestro gusto; que mi hija ni
yo, por el siglo de mi madre, que no nos hemos de mudar un paso de nuestra
aldea: la mujer honrada, la pierna quebrada, y en casa; y la doncella
honesta, el hacer algo es su fiesta. Idos con vuestro don Quijote a
vuestras aventuras, y dejadnos a nosotras con nuestras malas venturas, que
Dios nos las mejorará como seamos buenas; y yo no sé, por cierto, quién le
puso a él don, que no tuvieron sus padres ni sus agüelos.

-Ahora digo -replicó Sancho- que tienes algún familiar en ese cuerpo.
¡Válate Dios, la mujer, y qué de cosas has ensartado unas en otras, sin
tener pies ni cabeza! ¿Qué tiene que ver el Cascajo, los broches, los
refranes y el entono con lo que yo digo? Ven acá, mentecata e ignorante
(que así te puedo llamar, pues no entiendes mis razones y vas huyendo de la
dicha): si yo dijera que mi hija se arrojara de una torre abajo, o que se
fuera por esos mundos, como se quiso ir la infanta doña Urraca, tenías
razón de no venir con mi gusto; pero si en dos paletas, y en menos de un
abrir y cerrar de ojos, te la chanto un don y una señoría a cuestas, y te
la saco de los rastrojos, y te la pongo en toldo y en peana, y en un
estrado de más almohadas de velludo que tuvieron moros en su linaje los
Almohadas de Marruecos, ¿por qué no has de consentir y querer lo que yo
quiero?

-¿Sabéis por qué, marido? -respondió Teresa-; por el refrán que dice:
"¡Quien te cubre, te descubre!" Por el pobre todos pasan los ojos como de
corrida, y en el rico los detienen; y si el tal rico fue un tiempo pobre,
allí es el murmurar y el maldecir, y el peor perseverar de los
maldicientes, que los hay por esas calles a montones, como enjambres de
abejas.

-Mira, Teresa -respondió Sancho-, y escucha lo que agora quiero decirte;
quizá no lo habrás oído en todos los días de tu vida, y yo agora no hablo
de mío; que todo lo que pienso decir son sentencias del padre predicador
que la Cuaresma pasada predicó en este pueblo, el cual, si mal no me
acuerdo, dijo que todas las cosas presentes que los ojos están mirando se
presentan, están y asisten en nuestra memoria mucho mejor y con más
vehemencia que las cosas pasadas.

(Todas estas razones que aquí va diciendo Sancho son las segundas por quien
dice el tradutor que tiene por apócrifo este capítulo, que exceden a la
capacidad de Sancho. El cual prosiguió diciendo:)

-De donde nace que, cuando vemos alguna persona bien aderezada, y con ricos
vestidos compuesta, y con pompa de criados, parece que por fuerza nos mueve
y convida a que la tengamos respeto, puesto que la memoria en aquel
instante nos represente alguna bajeza en que vimos a la tal persona; la
cual inominia, ahora sea de pobreza o de linaje, como ya pasó, no es, y
sólo es lo que vemos presente. Y si éste a quien la fortuna sacó del
borrador de su bajeza (que por estas mesmas razones lo dijo el padre) a la
alteza de su prosperidad, fuere bien criado, liberal y cortés con todos, y
no se pusiere en cuentos con aquellos que por antigüedad son nobles, ten
por cierto, Teresa, que no habrá quien se acuerde de lo que fue, sino que
reverencien lo que es, si no fueren los invidiosos, de quien ninguna
próspera fortuna está segura.

-Yo no os entiendo, marido -replicó Teresa-: haced lo que quisiéredes, y no
me quebréis más la cabeza con vuestras arengas y retóricas. Y si estáis
revuelto en hacer lo que decís...

-Resuelto has de decir, mujer -dijo Sancho-, y no revuelto.

-No os pongáis a disputar, marido, conmigo -respondió Teresa-. Yo hablo
como Dios es servido, y no me meto en más dibujos; y digo que si estáis
porfiando en tener gobierno, que llevéis con vos a vuestro hijo Sancho,
para que desde agora le enseñéis a tener gobierno, que bien es que los
hijos hereden y aprendan los oficios de sus padres.

-En teniendo gobierno -dijo Sancho-, enviaré por él por la posta, y te
enviaré dineros, que no me faltarán, pues nunca falta quien se los preste a
los gobernadores cuando no los tienen; y vístele de modo que disimule lo
que es y parezca lo que ha de ser.

-Enviad vos dinero -dijo Teresa-, que yo os lo vistiré como un palmito.

-En efecto, quedamos de acuerdo -dijo Sancho- de que ha de ser condesa
nuestra hija.

-El día que yo la viere condesa -respondió Teresa-, ése haré cuenta que la
entierro, pero otra vez os digo que hagáis lo que os diere gusto, que con
esta carga nacemos las mujeres, de estar obedientes a sus maridos, aunque
sean unos porros.

Y, en esto, comenzó a llorar tan de veras como si ya viera muerta y
enterrada a Sanchica. Sancho la consoló diciéndole que, ya que la hubiese
de hacer condesa, la haría todo lo más tarde que ser pudiese. Con esto se
acabó su plática, y Sancho volvió a ver a don Quijote para dar orden en su
partida.





Capítulo VI. De lo que le pasó a Don Quijote con su sobrina y con su ama, y
es uno de los importantes capítulos de toda la historia


En tanto que Sancho Panza y su mujer Teresa Cascajo pasaron la impertinente
referida plática, no estaban ociosas la sobrina y el ama de don Quijote,
que por mil señales iban coligiendo que su tío y señor quería desgarrarse
la vez tercera, y volver al ejercicio de su, para ellas, mal andante
caballería: procuraban por todas las vías posibles apartarle de tan mal
pensamiento, pero todo era predicar en desierto y majar en hierro frío. Con
todo esto, entre otras muchas razones que con él pasaron, le dijo el ama:

-En verdad, señor mío, que si vuesa merced no afirma el pie llano y se está
quedo en su casa, y se deja de andar por los montes y por los valles como
ánima en pena, buscando esas que dicen que se llaman aventuras, a quien yo
llamo desdichas, que me tengo de quejar en voz y en grita a Dios y al rey,
que pongan remedio en ello.

A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Ama, lo que Dios responderá a tus quejas yo no lo sé, ni lo que ha de
responder Su Majestad tampoco, y sólo sé que si yo fuera rey, me escusara
de responder a tanta infinidad de memoriales impertinentes como cada día le
dan; que uno de los mayores trabajos que los reyes tienen, entre otros
muchos, es el estar obligados a escuchar a todos y a responder a todos; y
así, no querría yo que cosas mías le diesen pesadumbre.

A lo que dijo el ama:

-Díganos, señor: en la corte de Su Majestad, ¿no hay caballeros?

-Sí -respondió don Quijote-, y muchos; y es razón que los haya, para adorno
de la grandeza de los príncipes y para ostentación de la majestad real.

-Pues, ¿no sería vuesa merced -replicó ella- uno de los que a pie quedo
sirviesen a su rey y señor, estándose en la corte?

-Mira, amiga -respondió don Quijote-: no todos los caballeros pueden ser
cortesanos, ni todos los cortesanos pueden ni deben ser caballeros
andantes: de todos ha de haber en el mundo; y, aunque todos seamos
caballeros, va mucha diferencia de los unos a los otros; porque los
cortesanos, sin salir de sus aposentos ni de los umbrales de la corte, se
pasean por todo el mundo, mirando un mapa, sin costarles blanca, ni padecer
calor ni frío, hambre ni sed; pero nosotros, los caballeros andantes
verdaderos, al sol, al frío, al aire, a las inclemencias del cielo, de
noche y de día, a pie y a caballo, medimos toda la tierra con nuestros
mismos pies; y no solamente conocemos los enemigos pintados, sino en su
mismo ser, y en todo trance y en toda ocasión los acometemos, sin mirar en
niñerías, ni en las leyes de los desafíos; si lleva, o no lleva, más corta
la lanza, o la espada; si trae sobre sí reliquias, o algún engaño
encubierto; si se ha de partir y hacer tajadas el sol, o no, con otras
ceremonias deste jaez, que se usan en los desafíos particulares de persona
a persona, que tú no sabes y yo sí. Y has de saber más: que el buen
caballero andante, aunque vea diez gigantes que con las cabezas no sólo
tocan, sino pasan las nubes, y que a cada uno le sirven de piernas dos
grandísimas torres, y que los brazos semejan árboles de gruesos y poderosos
navíos, y cada ojo como una gran rueda de molino y más ardiendo que un
horno de vidrio, no le han de espantar en manera alguna; antes con gentil
continente y con intrépido corazón los ha de acometer y embestir, y, si
fuere posible, vencerlos y desbaratarlos en un pequeño instante, aunque
viniesen armados de unas conchas de un cierto pescado que dicen que son más
duras que si fuesen de diamantes, y en lugar de espadas trujesen cuchillos
tajantes de damasquino acero, o porras ferradas con puntas asimismo de
acero, como yo las he visto más de dos veces. Todo esto he dicho, ama mía,
porque veas la diferencia que hay de unos caballeros a otros; y sería razón
que no hubiese príncipe que no estimase en más esta segunda, o, por mejor
decir, primera especie de caballeros andantes, que, según leemos en sus
historias, tal ha habido entre ellos que ha sido la salud no sólo de un
reino, sino de muchos.

-¡Ah, señor mío! -dijo a esta sazón la sobrina-; advierta vuestra merced
que todo eso que dice de los caballeros andantes es fábula y mentira, y sus
historias, ya que no las quemasen, merecían que a cada una se le echase un
sambenito, o alguna señal en que fuese conocida por infame y por gastadora
de las buenas costumbres.

-Por el Dios que me sustenta -dijo don Quijote-, que si no fueras mi
sobrina derechamente, como hija de mi misma hermana, que había de hacer un
tal castigo en ti, por la blasfemia que has dicho, que sonara por todo el
mundo. ¿Cómo que es posible que una rapaza que apenas sabe menear doce
palillos de randas se atreva a poner lengua y a censurar las historias de
los caballeros andantes? ¿Qué dijera el señor Amadís si lo tal oyera? Pero
a buen seguro que él te perdonara, porque fue el más humilde y cortés
caballero de su tiempo, y, demás, grande amparador de las doncellas; mas,
tal te pudiera haber oído que no te fuera bien dello, que no todos son
corteses ni bien mirados: algunos hay follones y descomedidos. Ni todos los
que se llaman caballeros lo son de todo en todo: que unos son de oro, otros
de alquimia, y todos parecen caballeros, pero no todos pueden estar al
toque de la piedra de la verdad. Hombres bajos hay que revientan por
parecer caballeros, y caballeros altos hay que parece que aposta mueren por
parecer hombres bajos; aquéllos se llevantan o con la ambición o con la
virtud, éstos se abajan o con la flojedad o con el vicio; y es menester
aprovecharnos del conocimiento discreto para distinguir estas dos maneras
de caballeros, tan parecidos en los nombres y tan distantes en las
acciones.

-¡Válame Dios! -dijo la sobrina-. ¡Que sepa vuestra merced tanto, señor
tío, que, si fuese menester en una necesidad, podría subir en un púlpito e
irse a predicar por esas calles, y que, con todo esto, dé en una ceguera
tan grande y en una sandez tan conocida, que se dé a entender que es
valiente, siendo viejo, que tiene fuerzas, estando enfermo, y que endereza
tuertos, estando por la edad agobiado, y, sobre todo, que es caballero, no
lo siendo; porque, aunque lo puedan ser los hidalgos, no lo son los pobres!

-Tienes mucha razón, sobrina, en lo que dices -respondió don Quijote-, y
cosas te pudiera yo decir cerca de los linajes, que te admiraran; pero, por
no mezclar lo divino con lo humano, no las digo. Mirad, amigas: a cuatro
suertes de linajes, y estadme atentas, se pueden reducir todos los que hay
en el mundo, que son éstas: unos, que tuvieron principios humildes, y se
fueron estendiendo y dilatando hasta llegar a una suma grandeza; otros, que
tuvieron principios grandes, y los fueron conservando y los conservan y
mantienen en el ser que comenzaron; otros, que, aunque tuvieron principios
grandes, acabaron en punta, como pirámide, habiendo diminuido y aniquilado
su principio hasta parar en nonada, como lo es la punta de la pirámide, que
respeto de su basa o asiento no es nada; otros hay, y éstos son los más,
que ni tuvieron principio bueno ni razonable medio, y así tendrán el fin,
sin nombre, como el linaje de la gente plebeya y ordinaria. De los
primeros, que tuvieron principio humilde y subieron a la grandeza que agora
conservan, te sirva de ejemplo la Casa Otomana, que, de un humilde y bajo
pastor que le dio principio, está en la cumbre que le vemos. Del segundo
linaje, que tuvo principio en grandeza y la conserva sin aumentarla, serán
ejemplo muchos príncipes que por herencia lo son, y se conservan en ella,
sin aumentarla ni diminuirla, conteniéndose en los límites de sus estados
pacíficamente. De los que comenzaron grandes y acabaron en punta hay
millares de ejemplos, porque todos los Faraones y Tolomeos de Egipto, los
Césares de Roma, con toda la caterva, si es que se le puede dar este
nombre, de infinitos príncipes, monarcas, señores, medos, asirios, persas,
griegos y bárbaros, todos estos linajes y señoríos han acabado en punta y
en nonada, así ellos como los que les dieron principio, pues no será
posible hallar agora ninguno de sus decendientes, y si le hallásemos, sería
en bajo y humilde estado. Del linaje plebeyo no tengo qué decir, sino que
sirve sólo de acrecentar el número de los que viven, sin que merezcan otra
fama ni otro elogio sus grandezas. De todo lo dicho quiero que infiráis,
bobas mías, que es grande la confusión que hay entre los linajes, y que
solos aquéllos parecen grandes y ilustres que lo muestran en la virtud, y
en la riqueza y liberalidad de sus dueños. Dije virtudes, riquezas y
liberalidades, porque el grande que fuere vicioso será vicioso grande, y el
rico no liberal será un avaro mendigo; que al poseedor de las riquezas no
le hace dichoso el tenerlas, sino el gastarlas, y no el gastarlas
comoquiera, sino el saberlas bien gastar. Al caballero pobre no le queda
otro camino para mostrar que es caballero sino el de la virtud, siendo
afable, bien criado, cortés y comedido, y oficioso; no soberbio, no
arrogante, no murmurador, y, sobre todo, caritativo; que con dos maravedís
que con ánimo alegre dé al pobre se mostrará tan liberal como el que a
campana herida da limosna, y no habrá quien le vea adornado de las
referidas virtudes que, aunque no le conozca, deje de juzgarle y tenerle
por de buena casta, y el no serlo sería milagro; y siempre la alabanza fue
premio de la virtud, y los virtuosos no pueden dejar de ser alabados. Dos
caminos hay, hijas, por donde pueden ir los hombres a llegar a ser ricos y
honrados: el uno es el de las letras; otro, el de las armas. Yo tengo más
armas que letras, y nací, según me inclino a las armas, debajo de la
influencia del planeta Marte; así que, casi me es forzoso seguir por su
camino, y por él tengo de ir a pesar de todo el mundo, y será en balde
cansaros en persuadirme a que no quiera yo lo que los cielos quieren, la
fortuna ordena y la razón pide, y, sobre todo, mi voluntad desea. Pues con
saber, como sé, los innumerables trabajos que son anejos al andante
caballería, sé también los infinitos bienes que se alcanzan con ella; y sé
que la senda de la virtud es muy estrecha, y el camino del vicio, ancho y
espacioso; y sé que sus fines y paraderos son diferentes, porque el del
vicio, dilatado y espacioso, acaba en la muerte, y el de la virtud, angosto
y trabajoso, acaba en vida, y no en vida que se acaba, sino en la que no
tendrá fin; y sé, como dice el gran poeta castellano nuestro, que

Por estas asperezas se camina

de la inmortalidad al alto asiento,

do nunca arriba quien de allí declina.

-¡Ay, desdichada de mí -dijo la sobrina-, que también mi señor es poeta!.
Todo lo sabe, todo lo alcanza: yo apostaré que si quisiera ser albañil, que
supiera fabricar una casa como una jaula.

Yo te prometo, sobrina -respondió don Quijote-, que si estos pensamientos
caballerescos no me llevasen tras sí todos los sentidos, que no habría cosa
que yo no hiciese, ni curiosidad que no saliese de mis manos, especialmente
jaulas y palillos de dientes.

A este tiempo, llamaron a la puerta, y, preguntando quién llamaba,
respondió Sancho Panza que él era; y, apenas le hubo conocido el ama,
cuando corrió a esconderse por no verle: tanto le aborrecía. Abrióle la
sobrina, salió a recebirle con los brazos abiertos su señor don Quijote, y
encerráronse los dos en su aposento, donde tuvieron otro coloquio, que no
le hace ventaja el pasado.





Capítulo VII. De lo que pasó don Quijote con su escudero, con otros
sucesos famosísimos


Apenas vio el ama que Sancho Panza se encerraba con su señor, cuando dio en
la cuenta de sus tratos; y, imaginando que de aquella consulta había de
salir la resolución de su tercera salida y tomando su manto, toda llena de
congoja y pesadumbre, se fue a buscar al bachiller Sansón Carrasco,
pareciéndole que, por ser bien hablado y amigo fresco de su señor, le
podría persuadir a que dejase tan desvariado propósito.

Hallóle paseándose por el patio de su casa, y, viéndole, se dejó caer ante
sus pies, trasudando y congojosa. Cuando la vio Carrasco con muestras tan
doloridas y sobresaltadas, le dijo:

-¿Qué es esto, señora ama? ¿Qué le ha acontecido, que parece que se le
quiere arrancar el alma?

-No es nada, señor Sansón mío, sino que mi amo se sale; ¡sálese sin duda!

-Y ¿por dónde se sale, señora? -preguntó Sansón-. ¿Hásele roto alguna parte
de su cuerpo?

-No se sale -respondió ella-, sino por la puerta de su locura. Quiero
decir, señor bachiller de mi ánima, que quiere salir otra vez, que con ésta
será la tercera, a buscar por ese mundo lo que él llama venturas, que yo no
puedo entender cómo les da este nombre. La vez primera nos le volvieron
atravesado sobre un jumento, molido a palos. La segunda vino en un carro de
bueyes, metido y encerrado en una jaula, adonde él se daba a entender que
estaba encantado; y venía tal el triste, que no le conociera la madre que
le parió: flaco, amarillo, los ojos hundidos en los últimos camaranchones
del celebro, que, para haberle de volver algún tanto en sí, gasté más de
seiscientos huevos, como lo sabe Dios y todo el mundo, y mis gallinas, que
no me dejaran mentir.

-Eso creo yo muy bien -respondió el bachiller-; que ellas son tan buenas,
tan gordas y tan bien criadas, que no dirán una cosa por otra, si
reventasen. En efecto, señora ama: ¿no hay otra cosa, ni ha sucedido otro
desmán alguno, sino el que se teme que quiere hacer el señor don Quijote?

-No, señor -respondió ella.

-Pues no tenga pena -respondió el bachiller-, sino váyase en hora buena a
su casa, y téngame aderezado de almorzar alguna cosa caliente, y, de
camino, vaya rezando la oración de Santa Apolonia si es que la sabe, que yo
iré luego allá, y verá maravillas.

-¡Cuitada de mí! -replicó el ama-; ¿la oración de Santa Apolonia dice
vuestra merced que rece?: eso fuera si mi amo lo hubiera de las muelas,
pero no lo ha sino de los cascos.

-Yo sé lo que digo, señora ama: váyase y no se ponga a disputar conmigo,
pues sabe que soy bachiller por Salamanca, que no hay más que bachillear
-respondió Carrasco.

Y con esto, se fue el ama, y el bachiller fue luego a buscar al cura, a
comunicar con él lo que se dirá a su tiempo.

En el que estuvieron encerrados don Quijote y Sancho, pasaron las razones
que con mucha puntualidad y verdadera relación cuenta la historia.

Dijo Sancho a su amo:

-Señor, ya yo tengo relucida a mi mujer a que me deje ir con vuestra merced
adonde quisiere llevarme.

-Reducida has de decir, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que no relucida.

-Una o dos veces -respondió Sancho-, si mal no me acuerdo, he suplicado a
vuestra merced que no me emiende los vocablos, si es que entiende lo que
quiero decir en ellos, y que, cuando no los entienda, diga: ''Sancho, o
diablo, no te entiendo''; y si yo no me declarare, entonces podrá
emendarme; que yo soy tan fócil...

-No te entiendo, Sancho -dijo luego don Quijote-, pues no sé qué quiere
decir soy tan fócil.

-Tan fócil quiere decir -respondió Sancho- soy tan así.

-Menos te entiendo agora -replicó don Quijote.

-Pues si no me puede entender -respondió Sancho-, no sé cómo lo diga: no sé
más, y Dios sea conmigo.

-Ya, ya caigo -respondió don Quijote- en ello: tú quieres decir que eres
tan dócil, blando y mañero que tomarás lo que yo te dijere, y pasarás por
lo que te enseñare.

-Apostaré yo -dijo Sancho- que desde el emprincipio me caló y me entendió,
sino que quiso turbarme por oírme decir otras docientas patochadas.

-Podrá ser -replicó don Quijote-. Y, en efecto, ¿qué dice Teresa?

-Teresa dice -dijo Sancho- que ate bien mi dedo con vuestra merced, y que
hablen cartas y callen barbas, porque quien destaja no baraja, pues más
vale un toma que dos te daré. Y yo digo que el consejo de la mujer es poco,
y el que no le toma es loco.

-Y yo lo digo también -respondió don Quijote-. Decid, Sancho amigo; pasá
adelante, que habláis hoy de perlas.

-Es el caso -replicó Sancho- que, como vuestra merced mejor sabe, todos
estamos sujetos a la muerte, y que hoy somos y mañana no, y que tan presto
se va el cordero como el carnero, y que nadie puede prometerse en este
mundo más horas de vida de las que Dios quisiere darle, porque la muerte es
sorda, y, cuando llega a llamar a las puertas de nuestra vida, siempre va
depriesa y no la harán detener ni ruegos, ni fuerzas, ni ceptros, ni
mitras, según es pública voz y fama, y según nos lo dicen por esos
púlpitos.

-Todo eso es verdad -dijo don Quijote-, pero no sé dónde vas a parar.

-Voy a parar -dijo Sancho- en que vuesa merced me señale salario conocido
de lo que me ha de dar cada mes el tiempo que le sirviere, y que el tal
salario se me pague de su hacienda; que no quiero estar a mercedes, que
llegan tarde, o mal, o nunca; con lo mío me ayude Dios. En fin, yo quiero
saber lo que gano, poco o mucho que sea, que sobre un huevo pone la
gallina, y muchos pocos hacen un mucho, y mientras se gana algo no se
pierde nada. Verdad sea que si sucediese, lo cual ni lo creo ni lo espero,
que vuesa merced me diese la ínsula que me tiene prometida, no soy tan
ingrato, ni llevo las cosas tan por los cabos, que no querré que se aprecie
lo que montare la renta de la tal ínsula, y se descuente de mi salario gata
por cantidad.

-Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, a las veces, tan buena suele ser una
gata como una rata.

-Ya entiendo -dijo Sancho-: yo apostaré que había de decir rata, y no gata;
pero no importa nada, pues vuesa merced me ha entendido.

-Y tan entendido -respondió don Quijote- que he penetrado lo último de tus
pensamientos, y sé al blanco que tiras con las inumerables saetas de tus
refranes. Mira, Sancho: yo bien te señalaría salario, si hubiera hallado en
alguna de las historias de los caballeros andantes ejemplo que me
descubriese y mostrase, por algún pequeño resquicio, qué es lo que solían
ganar cada mes, o cada año; pero yo he leído todas o las más de sus
historias, y no me acuerdo haber leído que ningún caballero andante haya
señalado conocido salario a su escudero. Sólo sé que todos servían a
merced, y que, cuando menos se lo pensaban, si a sus señores les había
corrido bien la suerte, se hallaban premiados con una ínsula, o con otra
cosa equivalente, y, por lo menos, quedaban con título y señoría. Si con
estas esperanzas y aditamentos vos, Sancho, gustáis de volver a servirme,
sea en buena hora: que pensar que yo he de sacar de sus términos y quicios
la antigua usanza de la caballería andante es pensar en lo escusado. Así
que, Sancho mío, volveos a vuestra casa, y declarad a vuestra Teresa mi
intención; y si ella gustare y vos gustáredes de estar a merced conmigo,
bene quidem; y si no, tan amigos como de antes; que si al palomar no le
falta cebo, no le faltarán palomas. Y advertid, hijo, que vale más buena
esperanza que ruin posesión, y buena queja que mala paga. Hablo de esta
manera, Sancho, por daros a entender que también como vos sé yo arrojar
refranes como llovidos. Y, finalmente, quiero decir, y os digo, que si no
queréis venir a merced conmigo y correr la suerte que yo corriere, que Dios
quede con vos y os haga un santo; que a mí no me faltarán escuderos más
obedientes, más solícitos, y no tan empachados ni tan habladores como vos.

Cuando Sancho oyó la firme resolución de su amo se le anubló el cielo y se
le cayeron las alas del corazón, porque tenía creído que su señor no se
iría sin él por todos los haberes del mundo; y así, estando suspenso y
pensativo, entró Sansón Carrasco y la sobrina, deseosos de oír con qué
razones persuadía a su señor que no tornarse a buscar las aventuras. Llegó
Sansón, socarrón famoso, y, abrazándole como la vez primera y con voz
levantada, le dijo:

-¡Oh flor de la andante caballería; oh luz resplandeciente de las armas; oh
honor y espejo de la nación española! Plega a Dios todopoderoso, donde más
largamente se contiene, que la persona o personas que pusieren impedimento
y estorbaren tu tercera salida, que no la hallen en el laberinto de sus
deseos, ni jamás se les cumpla lo que mal desearen.

Y, volviéndose al ama, le dijo:

-Bien puede la señora ama no rezar más la oración de Santa Apolonia, que yo
sé que es determinación precisa de las esferas que el señor don Quijote
vuelva a ejecutar sus altos y nuevos pensamientos, y yo encargaría mucho mi
conciencia si no intimase y persuadiese a este caballero que no tenga más
tiempo encogida y detenida la fuerza de su valeroso brazo y la bondad de su
ánimo valentísimo, porque defrauda con su tardanza el derecho de los
tuertos, el amparo de los huérfanos, la honra de las doncellas, el favor de
las viudas y el arrimo de las casadas, y otras cosas deste jaez, que tocan,
atañen, dependen y son anejas a la orden de la caballería andante. ¡Ea,
señor don Quijote mío, hermoso y bravo, antes hoy que mañana se ponga
vuestra merced y su grandeza en camino; y si alguna cosa faltare para
ponerle en ejecución, aquí estoy yo para suplirla con mi persona y
hacienda; y si fuere necesidad servir a tu magnificencia de escudero, lo
tendré a felicísima ventura!

A esta sazón, dijo don Quijote, volviéndose a Sancho:

-¿No te dije yo, Sancho, que me habían de sobrar escuderos? Mira quién se
ofrece a serlo, sino el inaudito bachiller Sansón Carrasco, perpetuo
trastulo y regocijador de los patios de las escuelas salmanticenses, sano
de su persona, ágil de sus miembros, callado, sufridor así del calor como
del frío, así de la hambre como de la sed, con todas aquellas partes que se
requieren para ser escudero de un caballero andante. Pero no permita el
cielo que, por seguir mi gusto, desjarrete y quiebre la coluna de las
letras y el vaso de las ciencias, y tronque la palma eminente de las buenas
y liberales artes. Quédese el nuevo Sansón en su patria, y, honrándola,
honre juntamente las canas de sus ancianos padres; que yo con cualquier
escudero estaré contento, ya que Sancho no se digna de venir conmigo.

-Sí digno -respondió Sancho, enternecido y llenos de lágrimas los ojos; y
prosiguió-: No se dirá por mí, señor mío: el pan comido y la compañía
deshecha; sí, que no vengo yo de alguna alcurnia desagradecida, que ya sabe
todo el mundo, y especialmente mi pueblo, quién fueron los Panzas, de quien
yo deciendo, y más, que tengo conocido y calado por muchas buenas obras, y
por más buenas palabras, el deseo que vuestra merced tiene de hacerme
merced; y si me he puesto en cuentas de tanto más cuanto acerca de mi
salario, ha sido por complacer a mi mujer; la cual, cuando toma la mano a
persuadir una cosa, no hay mazo que tanto apriete los aros de una cuba como
ella aprieta a que se haga lo que quiere; pero, en efeto, el hombre ha de
ser hombre, y la mujer, mujer; y, pues yo soy hombre dondequiera, que no lo
puedo negar, también lo quiero ser en mi casa, pese a quien pesare; y así,
no hay más que hacer, sino que vuestra merced ordene su testamento con su
codicilo, en modo que no se pueda revolcar, y pongámonos luego en camino,
porque no padezca el alma del señor Sansón, que dice que su conciencia le
lita que persuada a vuestra merced a salir vez tercera por ese mundo; y yo
de nuevo me ofrezco a servir a vuestra merced fiel y legalmente, tan bien y
mejor que cuantos escuderos han servido a caballeros andantes en los
pasados y presentes tiempos.

Admirado quedó el bachiller de oír el término y modo de hablar de Sancho
Panza; que, puesto que había leído la primera historia de su señor, nunca
creyó que era tan gracioso como allí le pintan; pero, oyéndole decir ahora
testamento y codicilo que no se pueda revolcar, en lugar de testamento y
codicilo que no se pueda revocar, creyó todo lo que dél había leído, y
confirmólo por uno de los más solenes mentecatos de nuestros siglos; y dijo
entre sí que tales dos locos como amo y mozo no se habrían visto en el
mundo.

Finalmente, don Quijote y Sancho se abrazaron y quedaron amigos, y con
parecer y beneplácito del gran Carrasco, que por entonces era su oráculo,
se ordenó que de allí a tres días fuese su partida; en los cuales habría
lugar de aderezar lo necesario para el viaje, y de buscar una celada de
encaje, que en todas maneras dijo don Quijote que la había de llevar.
Ofreciósela Sansón, porque sabía no se la negaría un amigo suyo que la
tenía, puesto que estaba más escura por el orín y el moho que clara y
limpia por el terso acero.

Las maldiciones que las dos, ama y sobrina, echaron al bachiller no
tuvieron cuento: mesaron sus cabellos, arañaron sus rostros, y, al modo de
las endechaderas que se usaban, lamentaban la partida como si fuera la
muerte de su señor. El designo que tuvo Sansón, para persuadirle a que otra
vez saliese, fue hacer lo que adelante cuenta la historia, todo por consejo
del cura y del barbero, con quien él antes lo había comunicado.

En resolución, en aquellos tres días don Quijote y Sancho se acomodaron de
lo que les pareció convenirles; y, habiendo aplacado Sancho a su mujer, y
don Quijote a su sobrina y a su ama, al anochecer, sin que nadie lo viese,
sino el bachiller, que quiso acompañarles media legua del lugar, se
pusieron en camino del Toboso: don Quijote sobre su buen Rocinante, y
Sancho sobre su antiguo rucio, proveídas las alforjas de cosas tocantes a
la bucólica, y la bolsa de dineros que le dio don Quijote para lo que se
ofreciese. Abrazóle Sansón, y suplicóle le avisase de su buena o mala
suerte, para alegrarse con ésta o entristecerse con aquélla, como las leyes
de su amistad pedían. Prometióselo don Quijote, dio Sansón la vuelta a su
lugar, y los dos tomaron la de la gran ciudad del Toboso.





Capítulo VIII. Donde se cuenta lo que le sucedió a don Quijote, yendo a ver
su señora Dulcinea del Toboso


''¡Bendito sea el poderoso Alá! -dice Hamete Benengeli al comienzo deste
octavo capítulo-. ¡Bendito sea Alá!'', repite tres veces; y dice que da
estas bendiciones por ver que tiene ya en campaña a don Quijote y a Sancho,
y que los letores de su agradable historia pueden hacer cuenta que desde
este punto comienzan las hazañas y donaires de don Quijote y de su
escudero; persuádeles que se les olviden las pasadas caballerías del
ingenioso hidalgo, y pongan los ojos en las que están por venir, que desde
agora en el camino del Toboso comienzan, como las otras comenzaron en los
campos de Montiel, y no es mucho lo que pide para tanto como él promete; y
así prosigue diciendo:

Solos quedaron don Quijote y Sancho, y, apenas se hubo apartado Sansón,
cuando comenzó a relinchar Rocinante y a sospirar el rucio, que de
entrambos, caballero y escudero, fue tenido a buena señal y por felicísimo
agüero; aunque, si se ha de contar la verdad, más fueron los sospiros y
rebuznos del rucio que los relinchos del rocín, de donde coligió Sancho que
su ventura había de sobrepujar y ponerse encima de la de su señor,
fundándose no sé si en astrología judiciaria que él se sabía, puesto que la
historia no lo declara; sólo le oyeron decir que, cuando tropezaba o caía,
se holgara no haber salido de casa, porque del tropezar o caer no se sacaba
otra cosa sino el zapato roto o las costillas quebradas; y, aunque tonto,
no andaba en esto muy fuera de camino. Díjole don Quijote:

-Sancho amigo, la noche se nos va entrando a más andar, y con más escuridad
de la que habíamos menester para alcanzar a ver con el día al Toboso,
adonde tengo determinado de ir antes que en otra aventura me ponga, y allí
tomaré la bendición y buena licencia de la sin par Dulcinea, con la cual
licencia pienso y tengo por cierto de acabar y dar felice cima a toda
peligrosa aventura, porque ninguna cosa desta vida hace más valientes a los
caballeros andantes que verse favorecidos de sus damas.

-Yo así lo creo -respondió Sancho-; pero tengo por dificultoso que vuestra
merced pueda hablarla ni verse con ella, en parte, a lo menos, que pueda
recebir su bendición, si ya no se la echa desde las bardas del corral, por
donde yo la vi la vez primera, cuando le llevé la carta donde iban las
nuevas de las sandeces y locuras que vuestra merced quedaba haciendo en el
corazón de Sierra Morena.

-¿Bardas de corral se te antojaron aquéllas, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-,
adonde o por donde viste aquella jamás bastantemente alabada gentileza y
hermosura? No debían de ser sino galerías o corredores, o lonjas, o como
las llaman, de ricos y reales palacios.

-Todo pudo ser -respondió Sancho-, pero a mí bardas me parecieron, si no es
que soy falto de memoria.

-Con todo eso, vamos allá, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-, que como yo la
vea, eso se me da que sea por bardas que por ventanas, o por resquicios, o
verjas de jardines; que cualquier rayo que del sol de su belleza llegue a
mis ojos alumbrará mi entendimiento y fortalecerá mi corazón, de modo que
quede único y sin igual en la discreción y en la valentía.

-Pues en verdad, señor -respondió Sancho-, que cuando yo vi ese sol de la
señora Dulcinea del Toboso, que no estaba tan claro, que pudiese echar de
sí rayos algunos, y debió de ser que, como su merced estaba ahechando aquel
trigo que dije, el mucho polvo que sacaba se le puso como nube ante el
rostro y se le escureció.

-¡Que todavía das, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, en decir, en pensar, en creer
y en porfiar que mi señora Dulcinea ahechaba trigo, siendo eso un menester
y ejercicio que va desviado de todo lo que hacen y deben hacer las personas
principales que están constituidas y guardadas para otros ejercicios y
entretenimientos, que muestran a tiro de ballesta su principalidad...! Mal
se te acuerdan a ti, ¡oh Sancho!, aquellos versos de nuestro poeta donde
nos pinta las labores que hacían allá en sus moradas de cristal aquellas
cuatro ninfas que del Tajo amado sacaron las cabezas, y se sentaron a
labrar en el prado verde aquellas ricas telas que allí el ingenioso poeta
nos describe, que todas eran de oro, sirgo y perlas contestas y tejidas. Y
desta manera debía de ser el de mi señora cuando tú la viste; sino que la
envidia que algún mal encantador debe de tener a mis cosas, todas las que
me han de dar gusto trueca y vuelve en diferentes figuras que ellas tienen;
y así, temo que, en aquella historia que dicen que anda impresa de mis
hazañas, si por ventura ha sido su autor algún sabio mi enemigo, habrá
puesto unas cosas por otras, mezclando con una verdad mil mentiras,
divertiéndose a contar otras acciones fuera de lo que requiere la
continuación de una verdadera historia. ¡Oh envidia, raíz de infinitos
males y carcoma de las virtudes! Todos los vicios, Sancho, traen un no sé
qué de deleite consigo, pero el de la envidia no trae sino disgustos,
rancores y rabias.

-Eso es lo que yo digo también -respondió Sancho-, y pienso que en esa
leyenda o historia que nos dijo el bachiller Carrasco que de nosotros había
visto debe de andar mi honra a coche acá, cinchado, y, como dicen, al
estricote, aquí y allí, barriendo las calles. Pues, a fe de bueno, que no
he dicho yo mal de ningún encantador, ni tengo tantos bienes que pueda ser
envidiado; bien es verdad que soy algo malicioso, y que tengo mis ciertos
asomos de bellaco, pero todo lo cubre y tapa la gran capa de la simpleza
mía, siempre natural y nunca artificiosa. Y cuando otra cosa no tuviese
sino el creer, como siempre creo, firme y verdaderamente en Dios y en todo
aquello que tiene y cree la Santa Iglesia Católica Romana, y el ser enemigo
mortal, como lo soy, de los judíos, debían los historiadores tener
misericordia de mí y tratarme bien en sus escritos. Pero digan lo que
quisieren; que desnudo nací, desnudo me hallo: ni pierdo ni gano; aunque,
por verme puesto en libros y andar por ese mundo de mano en mano, no se me
da un higo que digan de mí todo lo que quisieren.

-Eso me parece, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, a lo que sucedió a un famoso
poeta destos tiempos, el cual, habiendo hecho una maliciosa sátira contra
todas las damas cortesanas, no puso ni nombró en ella a una dama que se
podía dudar si lo era o no; la cual, viendo que no estaba en la lista de
las demás, se quejó al poeta, diciéndole que qué había visto en ella para
no ponerla en el número de las otras, y que alargase la sátira, y la
pusiese en el ensanche; si no, que mirase para lo que había nacido. Hízolo
así el poeta, y púsola cual no digan dueñas, y ella quedó satisfecha, por
verse con fama, aunque infame. También viene con esto lo que cuentan de
aquel pastor que puso fuego y abrasó el templo famoso de Diana, contado por
una de las siete maravillas del mundo, sólo porque quedase vivo su nombre
en los siglos venideros; y, aunque se mandó que nadie le nombrase, ni
hiciese por palabra o por escrito mención de su nombre, porque no
consiguiese el fin de su deseo, todavía se supo que se llamaba Eróstrato.
También alude a esto lo que sucedió al grande emperador Carlo Quinto con un
caballero en Roma. Quiso ver el emperador aquel famoso templo de la
Rotunda, que en la antigüedad se llamó el templo de todos los dioses, y
ahora, con mejor vocación, se llama de todos los santos, y es el edificio
que más entero ha quedado de los que alzó la gentilidad en Roma, y es el
que más conserva la fama de la grandiosidad y magnificencia de sus
fundadores: él es de hechura de una media naranja, grandísimo en estremo,
y está muy claro, sin entrarle otra luz que la que le concede una ventana,
o, por mejor decir, claraboya redonda que está en su cima, desde la cual
mirando el emperador el edificio, estaba con él y a su lado un caballero
romano, declarándole los primores y sutilezas de aquella gran máquina y
memorable arquitetura; y, habiéndose quitado de la claraboya, dijo al
emperador: ''Mil veces, Sacra Majestad, me vino deseo de abrazarme con
vuestra Majestad y arrojarme de aquella claraboya abajo, por dejar de mí
fama eterna en el mundo''. ''Yo os agradezco -respondió el emperador- el no
haber puesto tan mal pensamiento en efeto, y de aquí adelante no os pondré
yo en ocasión que volváis a hacer prueba de vuestra lealtad; y así, os
mando que jamás me habléis, ni estéis donde yo estuviere''. Y, tras estas
palabras, le hizo una gran merced. Quiero decir, Sancho, que el deseo de
alcanzar fama es activo en gran manera. ¿Quién piensas tú que arrojó a
Horacio del puente abajo, armado de todas armas, en la profundidad del
Tibre? ¿Quién abrasó el brazo y la mano a Mucio? ¿Quién impelió a Curcio a
lanzarse en la profunda sima ardiente que apareció en la mitad de Roma?
¿Quién, contra todos los agüeros que en contra se le habían mostrado, hizo
pasar el Rubicón a César? Y, con ejemplos más modernos, ¿quién barrenó los
navíos y dejó en seco y aislados los valerosos españoles guiados por el
cortesísimo Cortés en el Nuevo Mundo? Todas estas y otras grandes y
diferentes hazañas son, fueron y serán obras de la fama, que los mortales
desean como premios y parte de la inmortalidad que sus famosos hechos
merecen, puesto que los cristianos, católicos y andantes caballeros más
habemos de atender a la gloria de los siglos venideros, que es eterna en
las regiones etéreas y celestes, que a la vanidad de la fama que en este
presente y acabable siglo se alcanza; la cual fama, por mucho que dure, en
fin se ha de acabar con el mesmo mundo, que tiene su fin señalado. Así, ¡oh
Sancho!, que nuestras obras no han de salir del límite que nos tiene puesto
la religión cristiana, que profesamos. Hemos de matar en los gigantes a la
soberbia; a la envidia, en la generosidad y buen pecho; a la ira, en el
reposado continente y quietud del ánimo; a la gula y al sueño, en el poco
comer que comemos y en el mucho velar que velamos; a la lujuria y lascivia,
en la lealtad que guardamos a las que hemos hecho señoras de nuestros
pensamientos; a la pereza, con andar por todas las partes del mundo,
buscando las ocasiones que nos puedan hacer y hagan, sobre cristianos,
famosos caballeros. Ves aquí, Sancho, los medios por donde se alcanzan los
estremos de alabanzas que consigo trae la buena fama.

-Todo lo que vuestra merced hasta aquí me ha dicho -dijo Sancho- lo he
entendido muy bien, pero, con todo eso, querría que vuestra merced me
sorbiese una duda que agora en este punto me ha venido a la memoria.

-Asolviese quieres decir, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-. Di en buen hora, que
yo responderé lo que supiere.

-Dígame, señor -prosiguió Sancho-: esos Julios o Agostos, y todos esos
caballeros hazañosos que ha dicho, que ya son muertos, ¿dónde están agora?

-Los gentiles -respondió don Quijote- sin duda están en el infierno; los
cristianos, si fueron buenos cristianos, o están en el purgatorio o en el
cielo.

-Está bien -dijo Sancho-, pero sepamos ahora: esas sepulturas donde están
los cuerpos desos señorazos, ¿tienen delante de sí lámparas de plata, o
están adornadas las paredes de sus capillas de muletas, de mortajas, de
cabelleras, de piernas y de ojos de cera? Y si desto no, ¿de qué están
adornadas?

A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Los sepulcros de los gentiles fueron por la mayor parte suntuosos templos:
las cenizas del cuerpo de Julio César se pusieron sobre una pirámide de
piedra de desmesurada grandeza, a quien hoy llaman en Roma La aguja de San
Pedro; al emperador Adriano le sirvió de sepultura un castillo tan grande
como una buena aldea, a quien llamaron Moles Hadriani, que agora es el
castillo de Santángel en Roma; la reina Artemisa sepultó a su marido
Mausoleo en un sepulcro que se tuvo por una de las siete maravillas del
mundo; pero ninguna destas sepulturas ni otras muchas que tuvieron los
gentiles se adornaron con mortajas ni con otras ofrendas y señales que
mostrasen ser santos los que en ellas estaban sepultados.

-A eso voy -replicó Sancho-. Y dígame agora: ¿cuál es más: resucitar a un
muerto, o matar a un gigante?

-La respuesta está en la mano -respondió don Quijote-: más es resucitar a
un muerto.

-Cogido le tengo -dijo Sancho-: luego la fama del que resucita muertos, da
vista a los ciegos, endereza los cojos y da salud a los enfermos, y delante
de sus sepulturas arden lámparas, y están llenas sus capillas de gentes
devotas que de rodillas adoran sus reliquias, mejor fama será, para este y
para el otro siglo, que la que dejaron y dejaren cuantos emperadores
gentiles y caballeros andantes ha habido en el mundo.

-También confieso esa verdad -respondió don Quijote.

-Pues esta fama, estas gracias, estas prerrogativas, como llaman a esto
-respondió Sancho-, tienen los cuerpos y las reliquias de los santos que,
con aprobación y licencia de nuestra santa madre Iglesia, tienen lámparas,
velas, mortajas, muletas, pinturas, cabelleras, ojos, piernas, con que
aumentan la devoción y engrandecen su cristiana fama. Los cuerpos de los
santos o sus reliquias llevan los reyes sobre sus hombros, besan los
pedazos de sus huesos, adornan y enriquecen con ellos sus oratorios y sus
más preciados altares...

-¿Qué quieres que infiera, Sancho, de todo lo que has dicho? -dijo don
Quijote.

-Quiero decir -dijo Sancho- que nos demos a ser santos, y alcanzaremos más
brevemente la buena fama que pretendemos; y advierta, señor, que ayer o
antes de ayer, que, según ha poco se puede decir desta manera, canonizaron
o beatificaron dos frailecitos descalzos, cuyas cadenas de hierro con que
ceñían y atormentaban sus cuerpos se tiene ahora a gran ventura el besarlas
y tocarlas, y están en más veneración que está, según dije, la espada de
Roldán en la armería del rey, nuestro señor, que Dios guarde. Así que,
señor mío, más vale ser humilde frailecito, de cualquier orden que sea,
que valiente y andante caballero; mas alcanzan con Dios dos docenas de
diciplinas que dos mil lanzadas, ora las den a gigantes, ora a vestiglos o
a endrigos.

-Todo eso es así -respondió don Quijote-, pero no todos podemos ser
frailes, y muchos son los caminos por donde lleva Dios a los suyos al
cielo: religión es la caballería; caballeros santos hay en la gloria.

-Sí -respondió Sancho-, pero yo he oído decir que hay más frailes en el
cielo que caballeros andantes.

-Eso es -respondió don Quijote- porque es mayor el número de los religiosos
que el de los caballeros.

-Muchos son los andantes -dijo Sancho.

-Muchos -respondió don Quijote-, pero pocos los que merecen nombre de
caballeros.

En estas y otras semejantes pláticas se les pasó aquella noche y el día
siguiente, sin acontecerles cosa que de contar fuese, de que no poco le
pesó a don Quijote. En fin, otro día, al anochecer, descubrieron la gran
ciudad del Toboso, con cuya vista se le alegraron los espíritus a don
Quijote y se le entristecieron a Sancho, porque no sabía la casa de
Dulcinea, ni en su vida la había visto, como no la había visto su señor; de
modo que el uno por verla, y el otro por no haberla visto, estaban
alborotados, y no imaginaba Sancho qué había de hacer cuando su dueño le
enviase al Toboso. Finalmente, ordenó don Quijote entrar en la ciudad
entrada la noche, y, en tanto que la hora se llegaba, se quedaron entre
unas encinas que cerca del Toboso estaban, y, llegado el determinado punto,
entraron en la ciudad, donde les sucedió cosas que a cosas llegan.





Capítulo IX. Donde se cuenta lo que en él se verá


Media noche era por filo, poco más a menos, cuando don Quijote y Sancho
dejaron el monte y entraron en el Toboso. Estaba el pueblo en un sosegado
silencio, porque todos sus vecinos dormían y reposaban a pierna tendida,
como suele decirse. Era la noche entreclara, puesto que quisiera Sancho que
fuera del todo escura, por hallar en su escuridad disculpa de su sandez. No
se oía en todo el lugar sino ladridos de perros, que atronaban los oídos de
don Quijote y turbaban el corazón de Sancho. De cuando en cuando, rebuznaba
un jumento, gruñían puercos, mayaban gatos, cuyas voces, de diferentes
sonidos, se aumentaban con el silencio de la noche, todo lo cual tuvo el
enamorado caballero a mal agüero; pero, con todo esto, dijo a Sancho:

-Sancho, hijo, guía al palacio de Dulcinea: quizá podrá ser que la hallemos
despierta.

-¿A qué palacio tengo de guiar, cuerpo del sol -respondió Sancho-, que en
el que yo vi a su grandeza no era sino casa muy pequeña?

-Debía de estar retirada, entonces -respondió don Quijote-, en algún
pequeño apartamiento de su alcázar, solazándose a solas con sus doncellas,
como es uso y costumbre de las altas señoras y princesas.

-Señor -dijo Sancho-, ya que vuestra merced quiere, a pesar mío, que sea
alcázar la casa de mi señora Dulcinea, ¿es hora ésta por ventura de hallar
la puerta abierta? Y ¿será bien que demos aldabazos para que nos oyan y nos
abran, metiendo en alboroto y rumor toda la gente? ¿Vamos por dicha a
llamar a la casa de nuestras mancebas, como hacen los abarraganados, que
llegan, y llaman, y entran a cualquier hora, por tarde que sea?

-Hallemos primero una por una el alcázar -replicó don Quijote-, que
entonces yo te diré, Sancho, lo que será bien que hagamos. Y advierte,
Sancho, que yo veo poco, o que aquel bulto grande y sombra que desde aquí
se descubre la debe de hacer el palacio de Dulcinea.

-Pues guíe vuestra merced -respondió Sancho-: quizá será así; aunque yo lo
veré con los ojos y lo tocaré con las manos, y así lo creeré yo como creer
que es ahora de día.

Guió don Quijote, y, habiendo andado como docientos pasos, dio con el bulto
que hacía la sombra, y vio una gran torre, y luego conoció que el tal
edificio no era alcázar, sino la iglesia principal del pueblo. Y dijo:

-Con la iglesia hemos dado, Sancho.

-Ya lo veo -respondió Sancho-; y plega a Dios que no demos con nuestra
sepultura, que no es buena señal andar por los cimenterios a tales horas, y
más, habiendo yo dicho a vuestra merced, si mal no me acuerdo, que la
casa desta señora ha de estar en una callejuela sin salida.

-¡Maldito seas de Dios, mentecato! -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Adónde has tú
hallado que los alcázares y palacios reales estén edificados en callejuelas
sin salida?

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, en cada tierra su uso: quizá se usa aquí en el
Toboso edificar en callejuelas los palacios y edificios grandes; y así,
suplico a vuestra merced me deje buscar por estas calles o callejuelas que
se me ofrecen: podría ser que en algún rincón topase con ese alcázar, que
le vea yo comido de perros, que así nos trae corridos y asendereados.

-Habla con respeto, Sancho, de las cosas de mi señora -dijo don Quijote-, y
tengamos la fiesta en paz, y no arrojemos la soga tras el caldero.

-Yo me reportaré -respondió Sancho-; pero, ¿con qué paciencia podré llevar
que quiera vuestra merced que de sola una vez que vi la casa de nuestra
ama, la haya de saber siempre y hallarla a media noche, no hallándola
vuestra merced, que la debe de haber visto millares de veces?

-Tú me harás desesperar, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-. Ven acá, hereje: ¿no te
he dicho mil veces que en todos los días de mi vida no he visto a la sin
par Dulcinea, ni jamás atravesé los umbrales de su palacio, y que sólo
estoy enamorado de oídas y de la gran fama que tiene de hermosa y discreta?

-Ahora lo oigo -respondió Sancho-; y digo que, pues vuestra merced no la ha
visto, ni yo tampoco...

-Eso no puede ser -replicó don Quijote-; que, por lo menos, ya me has dicho
tú que la viste ahechando trigo, cuando me trujiste la respuesta de la
carta que le envié contigo.

-No se atenga a eso, señor -respondió Sancho-, porque le hago saber que
también fue de oídas la vista y la respuesta que le truje; porque, así sé
yo quién es la señora Dulcinea como dar un puño en el cielo.

-Sancho, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, tiempos hay de burlar, y tiempos
donde caen y parecen mal las burlas. No porque yo diga que ni he visto ni
hablado a la señora de mi alma has tú de decir también que ni la has
hablado ni visto, siendo tan al revés como sabes.

Estando los dos en estas pláticas, vieron que venía a pasar por donde
estaban uno con dos mulas, que, por el ruido que hacía el arado, que
arrastraba por el suelo, juzgaron que debía de ser labrador, que habría
madrugado antes del día a ir a su labranza; y así fue la verdad. Venía el
labrador cantando aquel romance que dicen:

Mala la hubistes, franceses,

en esa de Roncesvalles.

-Que me maten, Sancho -dijo, en oyéndole, don Quijote-, si nos ha de
suceder cosa buena esta noche. ¿No oyes lo que viene cantando ese villano?

-Sí oigo -respondió Sancho-; pero, ¿qué hace a nuestro propósito la caza de
Roncesvalles? Así pudiera cantar el romance de Calaínos, que todo fuera uno
para sucedernos bien o mal en nuestro negocio.

Llegó, en esto, el labrador, a quien don Quijote preguntó:

-¿Sabréisme decir, buen amigo, que buena ventura os dé Dios, dónde son por
aquí los palacios de la sin par princesa doña Dulcinea del Toboso?

-Señor -respondió el mozo-, yo soy forastero y ha pocos días que estoy en
este pueblo, sirviendo a un labrador rico en la labranza del campo; en esa
casa frontera viven el cura y el sacristán del lugar; entrambos, o
cualquier dellos, sabrá dar a vuestra merced razón desa señora princesa,
porque tienen la lista de todos los vecinos del Toboso; aunque para mí
tengo que en todo él no vive princesa alguna; muchas señoras, sí,
principales, que cada una en su casa puede ser princesa.

-Pues entre ésas -dijo don Quijote- debe de estar, amigo, ésta por quien te
pregunto.

-Podría ser -respondió el mozo-; y adiós, que ya viene el alba.

Y, dando a sus mulas, no atendió a más preguntas. Sancho, que vio suspenso
a su señor y asaz mal contento, le dijo:

-Señor, ya se viene a más andar el día, y no será acertado dejar que nos
halle el sol en la calle; mejor será que nos salgamos fuera de la ciudad, y
que vuestra merced se embosque en alguna floresta aquí cercana, y yo
volveré de día, y no dejaré ostugo en todo este lugar donde no busque la
casa, alcázar o palacio de mi señora, y asaz sería de desdichado si no le
hallase; y, hallándole, hablaré con su merced, y le diré dónde y cómo queda
vuestra merced esperando que le dé orden y traza para verla, sin menoscabo
de su honra y fama.

-Has dicho, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, mil sentencias encerradas en el
círculo de breves palabras: el consejo que ahora me has dado le apetezco y
recibo de bonísima gana. Ven, hijo, y vamos a buscar donde me embosque, que
tú volverás, como dices, a buscar, a ver y hablar a mi señora, de cuya
discreción y cortesía espero más que milagrosos favores.

Rabiaba Sancho por sacar a su amo del pueblo, porque no averiguase la
mentira de la respuesta que de parte de Dulcinea le había llevado a Sierra
Morena; y así, dio priesa a la salida, que fue luego, y a dos millas del
lugar hallaron una floresta o bosque, donde don Quijote se emboscó en tanto
que Sancho volvía a la ciudad a hablar a Dulcinea; en cuya embajada le
sucedieron cosas que piden nueva atención y nuevo crédito.





Capítulo X. Donde se cuenta la industria que Sancho tuvo para encantar a la
señora Dulcinea, y de otros sucesos tan ridículos como verdaderos


Llegando el autor desta grande historia a contar lo que en este capítulo
cuenta, dice que quisiera pasarle en silencio, temeroso de que no había de
ser creído, porque las locuras de don Quijote llegaron aquí al término y
raya de las mayores que pueden imaginarse, y aun pasaron dos tiros de
ballesta más allá de las mayores. Finalmente, aunque con este miedo y
recelo, las escribió de la misma manera que él las hizo, sin añadir ni
quitar a la historia un átomo de la verdad, sin dársele nada por las
objeciones que podían ponerle de mentiroso. Y tuvo razón, porque la verdad
adelgaza y no quiebra, y siempre anda sobre la mentira como el aceite sobre
el agua.

Y así, prosiguiendo su historia, dice que, así como don Quijote se emboscó
en la floresta, encinar o selva junto al gran Toboso, mandó a Sancho volver
a la ciudad, y que no volviese a su presencia sin haber primero hablado de
su parte a su señora, pidiéndola fuese servida de dejarse ver de su cautivo
caballero, y se dignase de echarle su bendición, para que pudiese esperar
por ella felicísimos sucesos de todos sus acometimientos y dificultosas
empresas. Encargóse Sancho de hacerlo así como se le mandaba, y de traerle
tan buena respuesta como le trujo la vez primera.

-Anda, hijo -replicó don Quijote-, y no te turbes cuando te vieres ante la
luz del sol de hermosura que vas a buscar. ¡Dichoso tú sobre todos los
escuderos del mundo! Ten memoria, y no se te pase della cómo te recibe: si
muda las colores el tiempo que la estuvieres dando mi embajada; si se
desasosiega y turba oyendo mi nombre; si no cabe en la almohada, si acaso
la hallas sentada en el estrado rico de su autoridad; y si está en pie,
mírala si se pone ahora sobre el uno, ahora sobre el otro pie; si te repite
la respuesta que te diere dos o tres veces; si la muda de blanda en áspera,
de aceda en amorosa; si levanta la mano al cabello para componerle, aunque
no esté desordenado; finalmente, hijo, mira todas sus acciones y
movimientos; porque si tú me los relatares como ellos fueron, sacaré yo lo
que ella tiene escondido en lo secreto de su corazón acerca de lo que al
fecho de mis amores toca; que has de saber, Sancho, si no lo sabes, que
entre los amantes, las acciones y movimientos exteriores que muestran,
cuando de sus amores se trata, son certísimos correos que traen las nuevas
de lo que allá en lo interior del alma pasa. Ve, amigo, y guíete otra mejor
ventura que la mía, y vuélvate otro mejor suceso del que yo quedo temiendo
y esperando en esta amarga soledad en que me dejas.

-Yo iré y volveré presto -dijo Sancho-; y ensanche vuestra merced, señor
mío, ese corazoncillo, que le debe de tener agora no mayor que una
avellana, y considere que se suele decir que buen corazón quebranta mala
ventura, y que donde no hay tocinos, no hay estacas; y también se dice:
donde no piensa, salta la liebre. Dígolo porque si esta noche no hallamos
los palacios o alcázares de mi señora, agora que es de día los pienso
hallar, cuando menos los piense, y hallados, déjenme a mí con ella.

-Por cierto, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que siempre traes tus refranes tan
a pelo de lo que tratamos cuanto me dé Dios mejor ventura en lo que deseo.

Esto dicho, volvió Sancho las espaldas y vareó su rucio, y don Quijote se
quedó a caballo, descansando sobre los estribos y sobre el arrimo de su
lanza, lleno de tristes y confusas imaginaciones, donde le dejaremos,
yéndonos con Sancho Panza, que no menos confuso y pensativo se apartó de su
señor que él quedaba; y tanto, que, apenas hubo salido del bosque, cuando,
volviendo la cabeza y viendo que don Quijote no parecía, se apeó del
jumento, y, sentándose al pie de un árbol, comenzó a hablar consigo mesmo y
a decirse:

-Sepamos agora, Sancho hermano, adónde va vuesa merced. ¿Va a buscar algún
jumento que se le haya perdido? ''No, por cierto''. Pues, ¿qué va a buscar?
''Voy a buscar, como quien no dice nada, a una princesa, y en ella al sol
de la hermosura y a todo el cielo junto''. Y ¿adónde pensáis hallar eso que
decís, Sancho? ''¿Adónde? En la gran ciudad del Toboso''. Y bien: ¿y de
parte de quién la vais a buscar? ''De parte del famoso caballero don
Quijote de la Mancha, que desface los tuertos, y da de comer al que ha sed,
y de beber al que ha hambre''. Todo eso está muy bien. Y ¿sabéis su casa,
Sancho? ''Mi amo dice que han de ser unos reales palacios o unos soberbios
alcázares''. Y ¿habéisla visto algún día por ventura? ''Ni yo ni mi amo la
habemos visto jamás''. Y ¿paréceos que fuera acertado y bien hecho que si
los del Toboso supiesen que estáis vos aquí con intención de ir a
sonsacarles sus princesas y a desasosegarles sus damas, viniesen y os
moliesen las costillas a puros palos, y no os dejasen hueso sano? ''En
verdad que tendrían mucha razón, cuando no considerasen que soy mandado, y
que mensajero sois, amigo, no merecéis culpa, non''. No os fiéis en eso,
Sancho, porque la gente manchega es tan colérica como honrada, y no
consiente cosquillas de nadie. Vive Dios que si os huele, que os mando mala
ventura. ''¡Oxte, puto! ¡Allá darás, rayo! ¡No, sino ándeme yo buscando
tres pies al gato por el gusto ajeno! Y más, que así será buscar a Dulcinea
por el Toboso como a Marica por Rávena, o al bachiller en Salamanca. ¡El
diablo, el diablo me ha metido a mí en esto, que otro no!''

Este soliloquio pasó consigo Sancho, y lo que sacó dél fue que volvió a
decirse:

-Ahora bien, todas las cosas tienen remedio, si no es la muerte, debajo de
cuyo yugo hemos de pasar todos, mal que nos pese, al acabar de la vida.
Este mi amo, por mil señales, he visto que es un loco de atar, y aun
también yo no le quedo en zaga, pues soy más mentecato que él, pues le sigo
y le sirvo, si es verdadero el refrán que dice: "Dime con quién andas,
decirte he quién eres", y el otro de "No con quien naces, sino con quien
paces". Siendo, pues, loco, como lo es, y de locura que las más veces toma
unas cosas por otras, y juzga lo blanco por negro y lo negro por blanco,
como se pareció cuando dijo que los molinos de viento eran gigantes, y las
mulas de los religiosos dromedarios, y las manadas de carneros ejércitos de
enemigos, y otras muchas cosas a este tono, no será muy difícil hacerle
creer que una labradora, la primera que me topare por aquí, es la señora
Dulcinea; y, cuando él no lo crea, juraré yo; y si él jurare, tornaré yo a
jurar; y si porfiare, porfiaré yo más, y de manera que tengo de tener la
mía siempre sobre el hito, venga lo que viniere. Quizá con esta porfía
acabaré con él que no me envíe otra vez a semejantes mensajerías, viendo
cuán mal recado le traigo dellas, o quizá pensará, como yo imagino, que
algún mal encantador de estos que él dice que le quieren mal la habrá
mudado la figura por hacerle mal y daño.

Con esto que pensó Sancho Panza quedó sosegado su espíritu, y tuvo por bien
acabado su negocio, y deteniéndose allí hasta la tarde, por dar lugar a que
don Quijote pensase que le había tenido para ir y volver del Toboso; y
sucedióle todo tan bien que, cuando se levantó para subir en el rucio, vio
que del Toboso hacia donde él estaba venían tres labradoras sobre tres
pollinos, o pollinas, que el autor no lo declara, aunque más se puede creer
que eran borricas, por ser ordinaria caballería de las aldeanas; pero, como
no va mucho en esto, no hay para qué detenernos en averiguarlo. En
resolución: así como Sancho vio a las labradoras, a paso tirado volvió a
buscar a su señor don Quijote, y hallóle suspirando y diciendo mil amorosas
lamentaciones. Como don Quijote le vio, le dijo:

-¿Qué hay, Sancho amigo? ¿Podré señalar este día con piedra blanca, o con
negra?

-Mejor será -respondió Sancho- que vuesa merced le señale con almagre, como
rétulos de cátedras, porque le echen bien de ver los que le vieren.

-De ese modo -replicó don Quijote-, buenas nuevas traes.

-Tan buenas -respondió Sancho-, que no tiene más que hacer vuesa merced
sino picar a Rocinante y salir a lo raso a ver a la señora Dulcinea del
Toboso, que con otras dos doncellas suyas viene a ver a vuesa merced.

-¡Santo Dios! ¿Qué es lo que dices, Sancho amigo? -dijo don Quijote-. Mira
no me engañes, ni quieras con falsas alegrías alegrar mis verdaderas
tristezas.

-¿Qué sacaría yo de engañar a vuesa merced -respondió Sancho-, y más
estando tan cerca de descubrir mi verdad? Pique, señor, y venga, y verá
venir a la princesa, nuestra ama, vestida y adornada, en fin, como quien
ella es. Sus doncellas y ella todas son una ascua de oro, todas mazorcas de
perlas, todas son diamantes, todas rubíes, todas telas de brocado de más de
diez altos; los cabellos, sueltos por las espaldas, que son otros tantos
rayos del sol que andan jugando con el viento; y, sobre todo, vienen a
caballo sobre tres cananeas remendadas, que no hay más que ver.

-Hacaneas querrás decir, Sancho.

-Poca diferencia hay -respondió Sancho- de cananeas a hacaneas; pero,
vengan sobre lo que vinieren, ellas vienen las más galanas señoras que se
puedan desear, especialmente la princesa Dulcinea, mi señora, que pasma los
sentidos.

-Vamos, Sancho hijo -respondió don Quijote-; y, en albricias destas no
esperadas como buenas nuevas, te mando el mejor despojo que ganare en la
primera aventura que tuviere, y si esto no te contenta, te mando las crías
que este año me dieren las tres yeguas mías, que tú sabes que quedan para
parir en el prado concejil de nuestro pueblo.

-A las crías me atengo -respondió Sancho-, porque de ser buenos los
despojos de la primera aventura no está muy cierto.

Ya en esto salieron de la selva, y descubrieron cerca a las tres aldeanas.
Tendió don Quijote los ojos por todo el camino del Toboso, y como no vio
sino a las tres labradoras, turbóse todo, y preguntó a Sancho si las había
dejado fuera de la ciudad.

-¿Cómo fuera de la ciudad? -respondió-. ¿Por ventura tiene vuesa merced los
ojos en el colodrillo, que no vee que son éstas, las que aquí vienen,
resplandecientes como el mismo sol a mediodía?

-Yo no veo, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, sino a tres labradoras sobre tres
borricos.

-¡Agora me libre Dios del diablo! -respondió Sancho-. Y ¿es posible que
tres hacaneas, o como se llaman, blancas como el ampo de la nieve, le
parezcan a vuesa merced borricos? ¡Vive el Señor, que me pele estas barbas
si tal fuese verdad!

-Pues yo te digo, Sancho amigo -dijo don Quijote-, que es tan verdad que
son borricos, o borricas, como yo soy don Quijote y tú Sancho Panza; a lo
menos, a mí tales me parecen.

-Calle, señor -dijo Sancho-, no diga la tal palabra, sino despabile esos
ojos, y venga a hacer reverencia a la señora de sus pensamientos, que ya
llega cerca.

Y, diciendo esto, se adelantó a recebir a las tres aldeanas; y, apeándose
del rucio, tuvo del cabestro al jumento de una de las tres labradoras, y,
hincando ambas rodillas en el suelo, dijo:

-Reina y princesa y duquesa de la hermosura, vuestra altivez y grandeza sea
servida de recebir en su gracia y buen talente al cautivo caballero
vuestro, que allí está hecho piedra mármol, todo turbado y sin pulsos de
verse ante vuestra magnífica presencia. Yo soy Sancho Panza, su escudero, y
él es el asendereado caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, llamado por otro
nombre el Caballero de la Triste Figura.

A esta sazón, ya se había puesto don Quijote de hinojos junto a Sancho, y
miraba con ojos desencajados y vista turbada a la que Sancho llamaba reina
y señora, y, como no descubría en ella sino una moza aldeana, y no de muy
buen rostro, porque era carirredonda y chata, estaba suspenso y admirado,
sin osar desplegar los labios. Las labradoras estaban asimismo atónitas,
viendo aquellos dos hombres tan diferentes hincados de rodillas, que no
dejaban pasar adelante a su compañera; pero, rompiendo el silencio la
detenida, toda desgraciada y mohína, dijo:

-Apártense nora en tal del camino, y déjenmos pasar, que vamos de priesa.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-¡Oh princesa y señora universal del Toboso! ¿Cómo vuestro magnánimo
corazón no se enternece viendo arrodillado ante vuestra sublimada presencia
a la coluna y sustento de la andante caballería?

Oyendo lo cual, otra de las dos dijo:

-Mas, ¡jo, que te estrego, burra de mi suegro! ¡Mirad con qué se vienen los
señoritos ahora a hacer burla de las aldeanas, como si aquí no supiésemos
echar pullas como ellos! Vayan su camino, e déjenmos hacer el nueso, y
serles ha sano.

-Levántate, Sancho -dijo a este punto don Quijote-, que ya veo que la
Fortuna, de mi mal no harta, tiene tomados los caminos todos por donde
pueda venir algún contento a esta ánima mezquina que tengo en las carnes. Y
tú, ¡oh estremo del valor que puede desearse, término de la humana
gentileza, único remedio deste afligido corazón que te adora!, ya que el
maligno encantador me persigue, y ha puesto nubes y cataratas en mis ojos,
y para sólo ellos y no para otros ha mudado y transformado tu sin igual
hermosura y rostro en el de una labradora pobre, si ya también el mío no le
ha cambiado en el de algún vestiglo, para hacerle aborrecible a tus ojos,
no dejes de mirarme blanda y amorosamente, echando de ver en esta sumisión
y arrodillamiento que a tu contrahecha hermosura hago, la humildad con que
mi alma te adora.

-¡Tomá que mi agüelo! -respondió la aldeana-. ¡Amiguita soy yo de oír
resquebrajos! Apártense y déjenmos ir, y agradecérselo hemos.

Apartóse Sancho y dejóla ir, contentísimo de haber salido bien de su
enredo.

Apenas se vio libre la aldeana que había hecho la figura de Dulcinea,
cuando, picando a su cananea con un aguijón que en un palo traía, dio a
correr por el prado adelante. Y, como la borrica sentía la punta del
aguijón, que le fatigaba más de lo ordinario, comenzó a dar corcovos, de
manera que dio con la señora Dulcinea en tierra; lo cual visto por don
Quijote, acudió a levantarla, y Sancho a componer y cinchar el albarda, que
también vino a la barriga de la pollina. Acomodada, pues, la albarda, y
quiriendo don Quijote levantar a su encantada señora en los brazos sobre la
jumenta, la señora, levantándose del suelo, le quitó de aquel trabajo,
porque, haciéndose algún tanto atrás, tomó una corridica, y, puestas ambas
manos sobre las ancas de la pollina, dio con su cuerpo, más ligero que un
halcón, sobre la albarda, y quedó a horcajadas, como si fuera hombre; y
entonces dijo Sancho:

-¡Vive Roque, que es la señora nuestra ama más ligera que un acotán, y que
puede enseñar a subir a la jineta al más diestro cordobés o mejicano! El
arzón trasero de la silla pasó de un salto, y sin espuelas hace correr la
hacanea como una cebra. Y no le van en zaga sus doncellas; que todas corren
como el viento.

Y así era la verdad, porque, en viéndose a caballo Dulcinea, todas picaron
tras ella y dispararon a correr, sin volver la cabeza atrás por espacio de
más de media legua. Siguiólas don Quijote con la vista, y, cuando vio que
no parecían, volviéndose a Sancho, le dijo:

-Sancho, ¿qué te parece cuán malquisto soy de encantadores? Y mira hasta
dónde se estiende su malicia y la ojeriza que me tienen, pues me han
querido privar del contento que pudiera darme ver en su ser a mi señora. En
efecto, yo nací para ejemplo de desdichados, y para ser blanco y terrero
donde tomen la mira y asiesten las flechas de la mala fortuna. Y has
también de advertir, Sancho, que no se contentaron estos traidores de haber
vuelto y transformado a mi Dulcinea, sino que la transformaron y volvieron
en una figura tan baja y tan fea como la de aquella aldeana, y juntamente
le quitaron lo que es tan suyo de las principales señoras, que es el buen
olor, por andar siempre entre ámbares y entre flores. Porque te hago saber,
Sancho, que cuando llegé a subir a Dulcinea sobre su hacanea, según tú
dices, que a mí me pareció borrica, me dio un olor de ajos crudos, que me
encalabrinó y atosigó el alma.

-¡Oh canalla! -gritó a esta sazón Sancho- ¡Oh encantadores aciagos y
malintencionados, y quién os viera a todos ensartados por las agallas, como
sardinas en lercha! Mucho sabéis, mucho podéis y mucho más hacéis. Bastaros
debiera, bellacos, haber mudado las perlas de los ojos de mi señora en
agallas alcornoqueñas, y sus cabellos de oro purísimo en cerdas de cola de
buey bermejo, y, finalmente, todas sus faciones de buenas en malas, sin que
le tocárades en el olor; que por él siquiera sacáramos lo que estaba
encubierto debajo de aquella fea corteza; aunque, para decir verdad, nunca
yo vi su fealdad, sino su hermosura, a la cual subía de punto y quilates un
lunar que tenía sobre el labio derecho, a manera de bigote, con siete o
ocho cabellos rubios como hebras de oro y largos de más de un palmo.

-A ese lunar -dijo don Quijote-, según la correspondencia que tienen entre
sí los del rostro con los del cuerpo, ha de tener otro Dulcinea en la tabla
del muslo que corresponde al lado donde tiene el del rostro, pero muy
luengos para lunares son pelos de la grandeza que has significado.

-Pues yo sé decir a vuestra merced -respondió Sancho- que le parecían allí
como nacidos.

-Yo lo creo, amigo -replicó don Quijote-, porque ninguna cosa puso la
naturaleza en Dulcinea que no fuese perfecta y bien acabada; y así, si
tuviera cien lunares como el que dices, en ella no fueran lunares, sino
lunas y estrellas resplandecientes. Pero dime, Sancho: aquella que a mí me
pareció albarda, que tú aderezaste, ¿era silla rasa o sillón?

-No era -respondió Sancho- sino silla a la jineta, con una cubierta de
campo que vale la mitad de un reino, según es de rica.

-¡Y que no viese yo todo eso, Sancho! -dijo don Quijote-. Ahora torno a
decir, y diré mil veces, que soy el más desdichado de los hombres.

Harto tenía que hacer el socarrón de Sancho en disimular la risa, oyendo
las sandeces de su amo, tan delicadamente engañado. Finalmente, después de
otras muchas razones que entre los dos pasaron, volvieron a subir en sus
bestias, y siguieron el camino de Zaragoza, adonde pensaban llegar a tiempo
que pudiesen hallarse en unas solenes fiestas que en aquella insigne ciudad
cada año suelen hacerse. Pero, antes que allá llegasen, les sucedieron
cosas que, por muchas, grandes y nuevas, merecen ser escritas y leídas,
como se verá adelante.





Capítulo XI. De la estraña aventura que le sucedió al valeroso don Quijote
con el carro, o carreta, de Las Cortes de la Muerte


Pensativo además iba don Quijote por su camino adelante, considerando la
mala burla que le habían hecho los encantadores, volviendo a su señora
Dulcinea en la mala figura de la aldeana, y no imaginaba qué remedio
tendría para volverla a su ser primero; y estos pensamientos le llevaban
tan fuera de sí, que, sin sentirlo, soltó las riendas a Rocinante, el cual,
sintiendo la libertad que se le daba, a cada paso se detenía a pacer la
verde yerba de que aquellos campos abundaban. De su embelesamiento le
volvió Sancho Panza, diciéndole:

-Señor, las tristezas no se hicieron para las bestias, sino para los
hombres; pero si los hombres las sienten demasiado, se vuelven bestias:
vuestra merced se reporte, y vuelva en sí, y coja las riendas a Rocinante,
y avive y despierte, y muestre aquella gallardía que conviene que tengan
los caballeros andantes. ¿Qué diablos es esto? ¿Qué descaecimiento es éste?
¿Estamos aquí, o en Francia? Mas que se lleve Satanás a cuantas Dulcineas
hay en el mundo, pues vale más la salud de un solo caballero andante que
todos los encantos y transformaciones de la tierra.

-Calla, Sancho -respondió don Quijote con voz no muy desmayada-; calla,
digo, y no digas blasfemias contra aquella encantada señora, que de su
desgracia y desventura yo solo tengo la culpa: de la invidia que me tienen
los malos ha nacido su mala andanza.

-Así lo digo yo -respondió Sancho-: quien la vido y la vee ahora, ¿cuál es
el corazón que no llora?

-Eso puedes tú decir bien, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-, pues la viste en
la entereza cabal de su hermosura, que el encanto no se estendió a turbarte
la vista ni a encubrirte su belleza: contra mí solo y contra mis ojos se
endereza la fuerza de su veneno. Mas, con todo esto, he caído, Sancho, en
una cosa, y es que me pintaste mal su hermosura, porque, si mal no me
acuerdo, dijiste que tenía los ojos de perlas, y los ojos que parecen de
perlas antes son de besugo que de dama; y, a lo que yo creo, los de
Dulcinea deben ser de verdes esmeraldas, rasgados, con dos celestiales
arcos que les sirven de cejas; y esas perlas quítalas de los ojos y pásalas
a los dientes, que sin duda te trocaste, Sancho, tomando los ojos por los
dientes.

-Todo puede ser -respondió Sancho-, porque también me turbó a mí su
hermosura como a vuesa merced su fealdad. Pero encomendémoslo todo a Dios,
que Él es el sabidor de las cosas que han de suceder en este valle de
lágrimas, en este mal mundo que tenemos, donde apenas se halla cosa que
esté sin mezcla de maldad, embuste y bellaquería. De una cosa me pesa,
señor mío, más que de otras; que es pensar qué medio se ha de tener cuando
vuesa merced venza a algún gigante o otro caballero, y le mande que se vaya
a presentar ante la hermosura de la señora Dulcinea: ¿adónde la ha de
hallar este pobre gigante, o este pobre y mísero caballero vencido?
Paréceme que los veo andar por el Toboso hechos unos bausanes, buscando a
mi señora Dulcinea, y, aunque la encuentren en mitad de la calle, no la
conocerán más que a mi padre.

-Quizá, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, no se estenderá el encantamento a
quitar el conocimiento de Dulcinea a los vencidos y presentados gigantes y
caballeros; y, en uno o dos de los primeros que yo venza y le envíe,
haremos la experiencia si la ven o no, mandándoles que vuelvan a darme
relación de lo que acerca desto les hubiere sucedido.

-Digo, señor -replicó Sancho-, que me ha parecido bien lo que vuesa merced
ha dicho, y que con ese artificio vendremos en conocimiento de lo que
deseamos; y si es que ella a solo vuesa merced se encubre, la desgracia más
será de vuesa merced que suya; pero, como la señora Dulcinea tenga salud y
contento, nosotros por acá nos avendremos y lo pasaremos lo mejor que
pudiéremos, buscando nuestras aventuras y dejando al tiempo que haga de las
suyas, que él es el mejor médico destas y de otras mayores enfermedades.

Responder quería don Quijote a Sancho Panza, pero estorbóselo una carreta
que salió al través del camino, cargada de los más diversos y estraños
personajes y figuras que pudieron imaginarse. El que guiaba las mulas y
servía de carretero era un feo demonio. Venía la carreta descubierta al
cielo abierto, sin toldo ni zarzo. La primera figura que se ofreció a los
ojos de don Quijote fue la de la misma Muerte, con rostro humano; junto a
ella venía un ángel con unas grandes y pintadas alas; al un lado estaba un
emperador con una corona, al parecer de oro, en la cabeza; a los pies de la
Muerte estaba el dios que llaman Cupido, sin venda en los ojos, pero con su
arco, carcaj y saetas. Venía también un caballero armado de punta en
blanco, excepto que no traía morrión, ni celada, sino un sombrero lleno de
plumas de diversas colores; con éstas venían otras personas de diferentes
trajes y rostros. Todo lo cual visto de improviso, en alguna manera
alborotó a don Quijote y puso miedo en el corazón de Sancho; mas luego se
alegró don Quijote, creyendo que se le ofrecía alguna nueva y peligrosa
aventura, y con este pensamiento, y con ánimo dispuesto de acometer
cualquier peligro, se puso delante de la carreta, y, con voz alta y
amenazadora, dijo:

-Carretero, cochero, o diablo, o lo que eres, no tardes en decirme quién
eres, a dó vas y quién es la gente que llevas en tu carricoche, que más
parece la barca de Carón que carreta de las que se usan.

A lo cual, mansamente, deteniendo el Diablo la carreta, respondió:

-Señor, nosotros somos recitantes de la compañía de Angulo el Malo; hemos
hecho en un lugar que está detrás de aquella loma, esta mañana, que es la
octava del Corpus, el auto de Las Cortes de la Muerte, y hémosle de hacer
esta tarde en aquel lugar que desde aquí se parece; y, por estar tan cerca
y escusar el trabajo de desnudarnos y volvernos a vestir, nos vamos
vestidos con los mesmos vestidos que representamos. Aquel mancebo va de
Muerte; el otro, de Ángel; aquella mujer, que es la del autor, va de Reina;
el otro, de Soldado; aquél, de Emperador, y yo, de Demonio, y soy una de
las principales figuras del auto, porque hago en esta compañía los primeros
papeles. Si otra cosa vuestra merced desea saber de nosotros, pregúntemelo,
que yo le sabré responder con toda puntualidad; que, como soy demonio, todo
se me alcanza.

-Por la fe de caballero andante -respondió don Quijote-, que, así como vi
este carro, imaginé que alguna grande aventura se me ofrecía; y ahora digo
que es menester tocar las apariencias con la mano para dar lugar al
desengaño. Andad con Dios, buena gente, y haced vuestra fiesta, y mirad si
mandáis algo en que pueda seros de provecho, que lo haré con buen ánimo y
buen talante, porque desde mochacho fui aficionado a la carátula, y en mi
mocedad se me iban los ojos tras la farándula.

Estando en estas pláticas, quiso la suerte que llegase uno de la compañía,
que venía vestido de bojiganga, con muchos cascabeles, y en la punta de un
palo traía tres vejigas de vaca hinchadas; el cual moharracho, llegándose a
don Quijote, comenzó a esgrimir el palo y a sacudir el suelo con las
vejigas, y a dar grandes saltos, sonando los cascabeles, cuya mala visión
así alborotó a Rocinante, que, sin ser poderoso a detenerle don Quijote,
tomando el freno entre los dientes, dio a correr por el campo con más
ligereza que jamás prometieron los huesos de su notomía. Sancho, que
consideró el peligro en que iba su amo de ser derribado, saltó del rucio,
y a toda priesa fue a valerle; pero, cuando a él llegó, ya estaba en
tierra, y junto a él, Rocinante, que, con su amo, vino al suelo: ordinario
fin y paradero de las lozanías de Rocinante y de sus atrevimientos.

Mas, apenas hubo dejado su caballería Sancho por acudir a don Quijote,
cuando el demonio bailador de las vejigas saltó sobre el rucio, y,
sacudiéndole con ellas, el miedo y ruido, más que el dolor de los golpes,
le hizo volar por la campaña hacia el lugar donde iban a hacer la fiesta.
Miraba Sancho la carrera de su rucio y la caída de su amo, y no sabía a
cuál de las dos necesidades acudiría primero; pero, en efecto, como buen
escudero y como buen criado, pudo más con él el amor de su señor que el
cariño de su jumento, puesto que cada vez que veía levantar las vejigas en
el aire y caer sobre las ancas de su rucio eran para él tártagos y sustos
de muerte, y antes quisiera que aquellos golpes se los dieran a él en las
niñas de los ojos que en el más mínimo pelo de la cola de su asno. Con esta
perpleja tribulación llegó donde estaba don Quijote, harto más maltrecho de
lo que él quisiera, y, ayudándole a subir sobre Rocinante, le dijo:

-Señor, el Diablo se ha llevado al rucio.

-¿Qué diablo? -preguntó don Quijote.

-El de las vejigas -respondió Sancho.

-Pues yo le cobraré -replicó don Quijote-, si bien se encerrase con él en
los más hondos y escuros calabozos del infierno. Sígueme, Sancho, que la
carreta va despacio, y con las mulas della satisfaré la pérdida del rucio.

-No hay para qué hacer esa diligencia, señor -respondió Sancho-: vuestra
merced temple su cólera, que, según me parece, ya el Diablo ha dejado el
rucio, y vuelve a la querencia.

Y así era la verdad; porque, habiendo caído el Diablo con el rucio, por
imitar a don Quijote y a Rocinante, el Diablo se fue a pie al pueblo, y el
jumento se volvió a su amo.

-Con todo eso -dijo don Quijote-, será bien castigar el descomedimiento de
aquel demonio en alguno de los de la carreta, aunque sea el mesmo
emperador.

-Quítesele a vuestra merced eso de la imaginación -replicó Sancho-, y tome
mi consejo, que es que nunca se tome con farsantes, que es gente
favorecida. Recitante he visto yo estar preso por dos muertes y salir
libre y sin costas. Sepa vuesa merced que, como son gentes alegres y de
placer, todos los favorecen, todos los amparan, ayudan y estiman, y más
siendo de aquellos de las compañías reales y de título, que todos, o los
más, en sus trajes y compostura parecen unos príncipes.

-Pues con todo -respondió don Quijote-, no se me ha de ir el demonio
farsante alabando, aunque le favorezca todo el género humano.

Y, diciendo esto, volvió a la carreta, que ya estaba bien cerca del pueblo.
Iba dando voces, diciendo:

-Deteneos, esperad, turba alegre y regocijada, que os quiero dar a entender
cómo se han de tratar los jumentos y alimañas que sirven de caballería a
los escuderos de los caballeros andantes.

Tan altos eran los gritos de don Quijote, que los oyeron y entendieron los
de la carreta; y, juzgando por las palabras la intención del que las decía,
en un instante saltó la Muerte de la carreta, y tras ella, el Emperador, el
Diablo carretero y el Ángel, sin quedarse la Reina ni el dios Cupido; y
todos se cargaron de piedras y se pusieron en ala, esperando recebir a don
Quijote en las puntas de sus guijarros. Don Quijote, que los vio puestos en
tan gallardo escuadrón, los brazos levantados con ademán de despedir
poderosamente las piedras, detuvo las riendas a Rocinante y púsose a pensar
de qué modo los acometería con menos peligro de su persona. En esto que se
detuvo, llegó Sancho, y, viéndole en talle de acometer al bien formado
escuadrón, le dijo:

-Asaz de locura sería intentar tal empresa: considere vuesa merced, señor
mío, que para sopa de arroyo y tente bonete, no hay arma defensiva en el
mundo, si no es embutirse y encerrarse en una campana de bronce; y también
se ha de considerar que es más temeridad que valentía acometer un hombre
solo a un ejército donde está la Muerte, y pelean en persona emperadores, y
a quien ayudan los buenos y los malos ángeles; y si esta consideración no
le mueve a estarse quedo, muévale saber de cierto que, entre todos los que
allí están, aunque parecen reyes, príncipes y emperadores, no hay ningún
caballero andante.

-Ahora sí -dijo don Quijote- has dado, Sancho, en el punto que puede y debe
mudarme de mi ya determinado intento. Yo no puedo ni debo sacar la espada,
como otras veces muchas te he dicho, contra quien no fuere armado
caballero. A ti, Sancho, toca, si quieres tomar la venganza del agravio que
a tu rucio se le ha hecho, que yo desde aquí te ayudaré con voces y
advertimientos saludables.

-No hay para qué, señor -respondió Sancho-, tomar venganza de nadie, pues
no es de buenos cristianos tomarla de los agravios; cuanto más, que yo
acabaré con mi asno que ponga su ofensa en las manos de mi voluntad, la
cual es de vivir pacíficamente los días que los cielos me dieren de vida.

-Pues ésa es tu determinación -replicó don Quijote-, Sancho bueno, Sancho
discreto, Sancho cristiano y Sancho sincero, dejemos estas fantasmas y
volvamos a buscar mejores y más calificadas aventuras; que yo veo esta
tierra de talle, que no han de faltar en ella muchas y muy milagrosas.

Volvió las riendas luego, Sancho fue a tomar su rucio, la Muerte con todo
su escuadrón volante volvieron a su carreta y prosiguieron su viaje, y este
felice fin tuvo la temerosa aventura de la carreta de la Muerte, gracias
sean dadas al saludable consejo que Sancho Panza dio a su amo; al cual, el
día siguiente, le sucedió otra con un enamorado y andante caballero, de no
menos suspensión que la pasada.





Capítulo XII. De la estraña aventura que le sucedió al valeroso don
Quijote con el bravo Caballero de los Espejos


La noche que siguió al día del rencuentro de la Muerte la pasaron don
Quijote y su escudero debajo de unos altos y sombrosos árboles, habiendo, a
persuasión de Sancho, comido don Quijote de lo que venía en el repuesto del
rucio, y entre la cena dijo Sancho a su señor:

-Señor, ¡qué tonto hubiera andado yo si hubiera escogido en albricias los
despojos de la primera aventura que vuestra merced acabara, antes que las
crías de las tres yeguas! En efecto, en efecto, más vale pájaro en mano que
buitre volando.

-Todavía -respondió don Quijote-, si tú, Sancho, me dejaras acometer, como
yo quería, te hubieran cabido en despojos, por lo menos, la corona de oro
de la Emperatriz y las pintadas alas de Cupido, que yo se las quitara al
redropelo y te las pusiera en las manos.

-Nunca los cetros y coronas de los emperadores farsantes -respondió
Sancho Panza- fueron de oro puro, sino de oropel o hoja de lata.

-Así es verdad -replicó don Quijote-, porque no fuera acertado que los
atavíos de la comedia fueran finos, sino fingidos y aparentes, como lo es
la mesma comedia, con la cual quiero, Sancho, que estés bien, teniéndola en
tu gracia, y por el mismo consiguiente a los que las representan y a los
que las componen, porque todos son instrumentos de hacer un gran bien a la
república, poniéndonos un espejo a cada paso delante, donde se veen al vivo
las acciones de la vida humana, y ninguna comparación hay que más al vivo
nos represente lo que somos y lo que habemos de ser como la comedia y los
comediantes. Si no, dime: ¿no has visto tú representar alguna comedia
adonde se introducen reyes, emperadores y pontífices, caballeros, damas y
otros diversos personajes? Uno hace el rufián, otro el embustero, éste el
mercader, aquél el soldado, otro el simple discreto, otro el enamorado
simple; y, acabada la comedia y desnudándose de los vestidos della, quedan
todos los recitantes iguales.

-Sí he visto -respondió Sancho.

-Pues lo mesmo -dijo don Quijote- acontece en la comedia y trato deste
mundo, donde unos hacen los emperadores, otros los pontífices, y,
finalmente, todas cuantas figuras se pueden introducir en una comedia;
pero, en llegando al fin, que es cuando se acaba la vida, a todos les quita
la muerte las ropas que los diferenciaban, y quedan iguales en la
sepultura.

-¡Brava comparación! -dijo Sancho-, aunque no tan nueva que yo no la haya
oído muchas y diversas veces, como aquella del juego del ajedrez, que,
mientras dura el juego, cada pieza tiene su particular oficio; y, en
acabándose el juego, todas se mezclan, juntan y barajan, y dan con ellas en
una bolsa, que es como dar con la vida en la sepultura.

-Cada día, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, te vas haciendo menos simple y más
discreto.

-Sí, que algo se me ha de pegar de la discreción de vuestra merced
-respondió Sancho-; que las tierras que de suyo son estériles y secas,
estercolándolas y cultivándolas, vienen a dar buenos frutos: quiero decir
que la conversación de vuestra merced ha sido el estiércol que sobre la
estéril tierra de mi seco ingenio ha caído; la cultivación, el tiempo que
ha que le sirvo y comunico; y con esto espero de dar frutos de mí que sean
de bendición, tales, que no desdigan ni deslicen de los senderos de la
buena crianza que vuesa merced ha hecho en el agostado entendimiento mío.

Rióse don Quijote de las afectadas razones de Sancho, y parecióle ser
verdad lo que decía de su emienda, porque de cuando en cuando hablaba de
manera que le admiraba; puesto que todas o las más veces que Sancho quería
hablar de oposición y a lo cortesano, acababa su razón con despeñarse del
monte de su simplicidad al profundo de su ignorancia; y en lo que él se
mostraba más elegante y memorioso era en traer refranes, viniesen o no
viniesen a pelo de lo que trataba, como se habrá visto y se habrá notado en
el discurso desta historia.

En estas y en otras pláticas se les pasó gran parte de la noche, y a Sancho
le vino en voluntad de dejar caer las compuertas de los ojos, como él decía
cuando quería dormir, y, desaliñando al rucio, le dio pasto abundoso y
libre. No quitó la silla a Rocinante, por ser expreso mandamiento de su
señor que, en el tiempo que anduviesen en campaña, o no durmiesen debajo de
techado, no desaliñase a Rocinante: antigua usanza establecida y guardada
de los andantes caballeros, quitar el freno y colgarle del arzón de la
silla; pero, ¿quitar la silla al caballo?, ¡guarda!; y así lo hizo Sancho,
y le dio la misma libertad que al rucio, cuya amistad dél y de Rocinante
fue tan única y tan trabada, que hay fama, por tradición de padres a hijos,
que el autor desta verdadera historia hizo particulares capítulos della;
mas que, por guardar la decencia y decoro que a tan heroica historia se
debe, no los puso en ella, puesto que algunas veces se descuida deste su
prosupuesto, y escribe que, así como las dos bestias se juntaban, acudían a
rascarse el uno al otro, y que, después de cansados y satisfechos, cruzaba
Rocinante el pescuezo sobre el cuello del rucio (que le sobraba de la otra
parte más de media vara), y, mirando los dos atentamente al suelo, se
solían estar de aquella manera tres días; a lo menos, todo el tiempo que
les dejaban, o no les compelía la hambre a buscar sustento.

Digo que dicen que dejó el autor escrito que los había comparado en la
amistad a la que tuvieron Niso y Euríalo, y Pílades y Orestes; y si esto es
así, se podía echar de ver, para universal admiración, cuán firme debió ser
la amistad destos dos pacíficos animales, y para confusión de los hombres,
que tan mal saben guardarse amistad los unos a los otros. Por esto se dijo:

No hay amigo para amigo:

las cañas se vuelven lanzas;

y el otro que cantó:

De amigo a amigo la chinche, etc.

Y no le parezca a alguno que anduvo el autor algo fuera de camino en haber
comparado la amistad destos animales a la de los hombres, que de las
bestias han recebido muchos advertimientos los hombres y aprendido muchas
cosas de importancia, como son: de las cigüeñas, el cristel; de los perros,
el vómito y el agradecimiento; de las grullas, la vigilancia; de las
hormigas, la providencia; de los elefantes, la honestidad, y la lealtad,
del caballo.

Finalmente, Sancho se quedó dormido al pie de un alcornoque, y don Quijote
dormitando al de una robusta encina; pero, poco espacio de tiempo había
pasado, cuando le despertó un ruido que sintió a sus espaldas, y,
levantándose con sobresalto, se puso a mirar y a escuchar de dónde el ruido
procedía, y vio que eran dos hombres a caballo, y que el uno, dejándose
derribar de la silla, dijo al otro:

-Apéate, amigo, y quita los frenos a los caballos, que, a mi parecer, este
sitio abunda de yerba para ellos, y del silencio y soledad que han menester
mis amorosos pensamientos.

El decir esto y el tenderse en el suelo todo fue a un mesmo tiempo; y, al
arrojarse, hicieron ruido las armas de que venía armado, manifiesta señal
por donde conoció don Quijote que debía de ser caballero andante; y,
llegándose a Sancho, que dormía, le trabó del brazo, y con no pequeño
trabajo le volvió en su acuerdo, y con voz baja le dijo:

-Hermano Sancho, aventura tenemos.

-Dios nos la dé buena -respondió Sancho-; y ¿adónde está, señor mío, su
merced de esa señora aventura?

-¿Adónde, Sancho? -replicó don Quijote-; vuelve los ojos y mira, y verás
allí tendido un andante caballero, que, a lo que a mí se me trasluce, no
debe de estar demasiadamente alegre, porque le vi arrojar del caballo y
tenderse en el suelo con algunas muestras de despecho, y al caer le
crujieron las armas.

-Pues ¿en qué halla vuesa merced -dijo Sancho- que ésta sea aventura?

-No quiero yo decir -respondió don Quijote- que ésta sea aventura del todo,
sino principio della; que por aquí se comienzan las aventuras. Pero
escucha, que, a lo que parece, templando está un laúd o vigüela, y, según
escupe y se desembaraza el pecho, debe de prepararse para cantar algo.

-A buena fe que es así -respondió Sancho-, y que debe de ser caballero
enamorado.

-No hay ninguno de los andantes que no lo sea -dijo don Quijote-. Y
escuchémosle, que por el hilo sacaremos el ovillo de sus pensamientos, si
es que canta; que de la abundancia del corazón habla la lengua.

Replicar quería Sancho a su amo, pero la voz del Caballero del Bosque, que
no era muy mala mi muy buena, lo estorbó; y, estando los dos atónitos,
oyeron que lo que cantó fue este soneto:

  -Dadme, señora, un término que siga,
  conforme a vuestra voluntad cortado;
  que será de la mía así estimado,
  que por jamás un punto dél desdiga.
  Si gustáis que callando mi fatiga
  muera, contadme ya por acabado:
  si queréis que os la cuente en desusado
  modo, haré que el mesmo amor la diga.
  A prueba de contrarios estoy hecho,
  de blanda cera y de diamante duro,
  y a las leyes de amor el ama ajusto.
  Blando cual es, o fuerte, ofrezco el pecho:
  entallad o imprimid lo que os dé gusto,
  que de guardarlo eternamente juro.

Con un ¡ay!, arrancado, al parecer, de lo íntimo de su corazón, dio fin a
su canto el Caballero del Bosque, y, de allí a un poco, con voz doliente y
lastimada, dijo:

-¡Oh la más hermosa y la más ingrata mujer del orbe! ¿Cómo que será
posible, serenísima Casildea de Vandalia, que has de consentir que se
consuma y acabe en continuas peregrinaciones y en ásperos y duros trabajos
este tu cautivo caballero? ¿No basta ya que he hecho que te confiesen por
la más hermosa del mundo todos los caballeros de Navarra, todos los
leoneses, todos los tartesios, todos los castellanos, y, finalmente, todos
los caballeros de la Mancha?

-Eso no -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, que yo soy de la Mancha y nunca
tal he confesado, ni podía ni debía confesar una cosa tan perjudicial a la
belleza de mi señora; y este tal caballero ya vees tú, Sancho, que
desvaría. Pero, escuchemos: quizá se declarará más.

-Si hará -replicó Sancho-, que término lleva de quejarse un mes arreo.

Pero no fue así, porque, habiendo entreoído el Caballero del Bosque que
hablaban cerca dél, sin pasar adelante en su lamentación, se puso en pie, y
dijo con voz sonora y comedida:

-¿Quién va allá? ¿Qué gente? ¿Es por ventura de la del número de los
contentos, o la del de los afligidos?

-De los afligidos -respondió don Quijote.

-Pues lléguese a mí -respondió el del Bosque-, y hará cuenta que se llega
a la mesma tristeza y a la aflición mesma.

Don Quijote, que se vio responder tan tierna y comedidamente, se llegó a
él, y Sancho ni más ni menos.

El caballero lamentador asió a don Quijote del brazo, diciendo:

-Sentaos aquí, señor caballero, que para entender que lo sois, y de los que
profesan la andante caballería, bástame el haberos hallado en este lugar,
donde la soledad y el sereno os hacen compañía, naturales lechos y propias
estancias de los caballeros andantes.

A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Caballero soy, y de la profesión que decís; y, aunque en mi alma tienen su
propio asiento las tristezas, las desgracias y las desventuras, no por eso
se ha ahuyentado della la compasión que tengo de las ajenas desdichas. De
lo que contaste poco ha, colegí que las vuestras son enamoradas, quiero
decir, del amor que tenéis a aquella hermosa ingrata que en vuestras
lamentaciones nombrastes.

Ya cuando esto pasaban estaban sentados juntos sobre la dura tierra, en
buena paz y compañía, como si al romper del día no se hubieran de romper
las cabezas.

-Por ventura, señor caballero -preguntó el del Bosque a don Quijote-, ¿sois
enamorado?

-Por desventura lo soy -respondió don Quijote-; aunque los daños que nacen
de los bien colocados pensamientos, antes se deben tener por gracias que
por desdichas.

-Así es la verdad -replicó el del Bosque-, si no nos turbasen la razón y el
entendimiento los desdenes, que, siendo muchos, parecen venganzas.

-Nunca fui desdeñado de mi señora -respondió don Quijote.

-No, por cierto -dijo Sancho, que allí junto estaba-, porque es mi señora
como una borrega mansa: es más blanda que una manteca.

-¿Es vuestro escudero éste? -preguntó el del Bosque.

-Sí es -respondió don Quijote.

-Nunca he visto yo escudero -replicó el del Bosque- que se atreva a hablar
donde habla su señor; a lo menos, ahí está ese mío, que es tan grande como
su padre, y no se probará que haya desplegado el labio donde yo hablo.

-Pues a fe -dijo Sancho-, que he hablado yo, y puedo hablar delante de otro
tan..., y aun quédese aquí, que es peor meneallo.

El escudero del Bosque asió por el brazo a Sancho, diciéndole:

-Vámonos los dos donde podamos hablar escuderilmente todo cuanto
quisiéremos, y dejemos a estos señores amos nuestros que se den de las
astas, contándose las historias de sus amores; que a buen seguro que les ha
de coger el día en ellas y no las han de haber acabado.

-Sea en buena hora -dijo Sancho-; y yo le diré a vuestra merced quién soy,
para que vea si puedo entrar en docena con los más hablantes escuderos.

Con esto se apartaron los dos escuderos, entre los cuales pasó un tan
gracioso coloquio como fue grave el que pasó entre sus señores.





Capítulo XIII. Donde se prosigue la aventura del Caballero del Bosque, con
el discreto, nuevo y suave coloquio que pasó entre los dos escuderos


Divididos estaban caballeros y escuderos: éstos contándose sus vidas, y
aquéllos sus amores; pero la historia cuenta primero el razonamiento de los
mozos y luego prosigue el de los amos; y así, dice que, apartándose un poco
dellos, el del Bosque dijo a Sancho:

-Trabajosa vida es la que pasamos y vivimos, señor mío, estos que somos
escuderos de caballeros andantes: en verdad que comemos el pan en el sudor
de nuestros rostros, que es una de las maldiciones que echó Dios a nuestros
primeros padres.

-También se puede decir -añadió Sancho- que lo comemos en el yelo de
nuestros cuerpos; porque, ¿quién más calor y más frío que los miserables
escuderos de la andante caballería? Y aun menos mal si comiéramos, pues los
duelos, con pan son menos; pero tal vez hay que se nos pasa un día y dos
sin desayunarnos, si no es del viento que sopla.

-Todo eso se puede llevar y conllevar -dijo el del Bosque-, con la
esperanza que tenemos del premio; porque si demasiadamente no es
desgraciado el caballero andante a quien un escudero sirve, por lo menos, a
pocos lances se verá premiado con un hermoso gobierno de cualque ínsula, o
con un condado de buen parecer.

Yo -replicó Sancho- ya he dicho a mi amo que me contento con el gobierno de
alguna ínsula; y él es tan noble y tan liberal, que me le ha prometido
muchas y diversas veces.

Yo -dijo el del Bosque-, con un canonicato quedaré satisfecho de mis
servicios, y ya me le tiene mandado mi amo, y ¡qué tal!

-Debe de ser -dijo Sancho- su amo de vuesa merced caballero a lo
eclesiástico, y podrá hacer esas mercedes a sus buenos escuderos; pero el
mío es meramente lego, aunque yo me acuerdo cuando le querían aconsejar
personas discretas, aunque, a mi parecer mal intencionadas, que procurase
ser arzobispo; pero él no quiso sino ser emperador, y yo estaba entonces
temblando si le venía en voluntad de ser de la Iglesia, por no hallarme
suficiente de tener beneficios por ella; porque le hago saber a vuesa
merced que, aunque parezco hombre, soy una bestia para ser de la Iglesia.

-Pues en verdad que lo yerra vuesa merced -dijo el del Bosque-, a causa que
los gobiernos insulanos no son todos de buena data. Algunos hay torcidos,
algunos pobres, algunos malencónicos, y finalmente, el más erguido y bien
dispuesto trae consigo una pesada carga de pensamientos y de incomodidades,
que pone sobre sus hombros el desdichado que le cupo en suerte. Harto mejor
sería que los que profesamos esta maldita servidumbre nos retirásemos a
nuestras casas, y allí nos entretuviésemos en ejercicios más suaves, como
si dijésemos, cazando o pescando; que, ¿qué escudero hay tan pobre en el
mundo, a quien le falte un rocín, y un par de galgos, y una caña de pescar,
con que entretenerse en su aldea?

-A mí no me falta nada deso -respondió Sancho-: verdad es que no tengo
rocín, pero tengo un asno que vale dos veces más que el caballo de mi amo.
Mala pascua me dé Dios, y sea la primera que viniere, si le trocara por él,
aunque me diesen cuatro fanegas de cebada encima. A burla tendrá vuesa
merced el valor de mi rucio, que rucio es el color de mi jumento. Pues
galgos no me habían de faltar, habiéndolos sobrados en mi pueblo; y más,
que entonces es la caza más gustosa cuando se hace a costa ajena.

-Real y verdaderamente -respondió el del Bosque-, señor escudero, que tengo
propuesto y determinado de dejar estas borracherías destos caballeros, y
retirarme a mi aldea, y criar mis hijitos, que tengo tres como tres
orientales perlas.

-Dos tengo yo -dijo Sancho-, que se pueden presentar al Papa en persona,
especialmente una muchacha a quien crío para condesa, si Dios fuere
servido, aunque a pesar de su madre.

-Y ¿qué edad tiene esa señora que se cría para condesa? -preguntó el del
Bosque.

-Quince años, dos más a menos -respondió Sancho-, pero es tan grande como
una lanza, y tan fresca como una mañana de abril, y tiene una fuerza de un
ganapán.

-Partes son ésas -respondió el del Bosque- no sólo para ser condesa, sino
para ser ninfa del verde bosque. ¡Oh hideputa, puta, y qué rejo debe de
tener la bellaca!

A lo que respondió Sancho, algo mohíno:

-Ni ella es puta, ni lo fue su madre, ni lo será ninguna de las dos, Dios
quiriendo, mientras yo viviere. Y háblese más comedidamente, que, para
haberse criado vuesa merced entre caballeros andantes, que son la mesma
cortesía, no me parecen muy concertadas esas palabras.

-¡Oh, qué mal se le entiende a vuesa merced -replicó el del Bosque- de
achaque de alabanzas, señor escudero! ¿Cómo y no sabe que cuando algún
caballero da una buena lanzada al toro en la plaza, o cuando alguna persona
hace alguna cosa bien hecha, suele decir el vulgo: "¡Oh hideputa, puto, y
qué bien que lo ha hecho!?" Y aquello que parece vituperio, en aquel
término, es alabanza notable; y renegad vos, señor, de los hijos o hijas
que no hacen obras que merezcan se les den a sus padres loores semejantes.

-Sí reniego -respondió Sancho-, y dese modo y por esa misma razón podía
echar vuestra merced a mí y hijos y a mi mujer toda una putería encima,
porque todo cuanto hacen y dicen son estremos dignos de semejantes
alabanzas, y para volverlos a ver ruego yo a Dios me saque de pecado
mortal, que lo mesmo será si me saca deste peligroso oficio de escudero, en
el cual he incurrido segunda vez, cebado y engañado de una bolsa con cien
ducados que me hallé un día en el corazón de Sierra Morena, y el diablo me
pone ante los ojos aquí, allí, acá no, sino acullá, un talego lleno de
doblones, que me parece que a cada paso le toco con la mano, y me abrazo
con él, y lo llevo a mi casa, y echo censos, y fundo rentas, y vivo como un
príncipe; y el rato que en esto pienso se me hacen fáciles y llevaderos
cuantos trabajos padezco con este mentecato de mi amo, de quien sé que
tiene más de loco que de caballero.

-Por eso -respondió el del Bosque- dicen que la codicia rompe el saco; y si
va a tratar dellos, no hay otro mayor en el mundo que mi amo, porque es de
aquellos que dicen: "Cuidados ajenos matan al asno"; pues, porque cobre
otro caballero el juicio que ha perdido, se hace el loco, y anda buscando
lo que no sé si después de hallado le ha de salir a los hocicos.

-Y ¿es enamorado, por dicha?

-Sí -dijo el del Bosque-: de una tal Casildea de Vandalia, la más cruda y
la más asada señora que en todo el orbe puede hallarse; pero no cojea del
pie de la crudeza, que otros mayores embustes le gruñen en las entrañas, y
ello dirá antes de muchas horas.

-No hay camino tan llano -replicó Sancho- que no tenga algún tropezón o
barranco; en otras casas cuecen habas, y en la mía, a calderadas; más
acompañados y paniaguados debe de tener la locura que la discreción. Mas si
es verdad lo que comúnmente se dice, que el tener compañeros en los
trabajos suele servir de alivio en ellos, con vuestra merced podré
consolarme, pues sirve a otro amo tan tonto como el mío.

-Tonto, pero valiente -respondió el del Bosque-, y más bellaco que tonto y
que valiente.

-Eso no es el mío -respondió Sancho-: digo, que no tiene nada de bellaco;
antes tiene una alma como un cántaro: no sabe hacer mal a nadie, sino bien
a todos, ni tiene malicia alguna: un niño le hará entender que es de noche
en la mitad del día; y por esta sencillez le quiero como a las telas de mi
corazón, y no me amaño a dejarle, por más disparates que haga.

-Con todo eso, hermano y señor -dijo el del Bosque-, si el ciego guía al
ciego, ambos van a peligro de caer en el hoyo. Mejor es retirarnos con buen
compás de pies, y volvernos a nuestras querencias; que los que buscan
aventuras no siempre las hallan buenas.

Escupía Sancho a menudo, al parecer, un cierto género de saliva pegajosa y
algo seca; lo cual visto y notado por el caritativo bosqueril escudero,
dijo:

-Paréceme que de lo que hemos hablado se nos pegan al paladar las lenguas;
pero yo traigo un despegador pendiente del arzón de mi caballo, que es tal
como bueno.

Y, levantándose, volvió desde allí a un poco con una gran bota de vino y
una empanada de media vara; y no es encarecimiento, porque era de un conejo
albar, tan grande que Sancho, al tocarla, entendió ser de algún cabrón, no
que de cabrito; lo cual visto por Sancho, dijo:

-Y ¿esto trae vuestra merced consigo, señor?

-Pues, ¿qué se pensaba? -respondió el otro-. ¿Soy yo por ventura algún
escudero de agua y lana? Mejor repuesto traigo yo en las ancas de mi
caballo que lleva consigo cuando va de camino un general.

Comió Sancho sin hacerse de rogar, y tragaba a escuras bocados de nudos de
suelta. Y dijo:

-Vuestra merced sí que es escudero fiel y legal, moliente y corriente,
magnífico y grande, como lo muestra este banquete, que si no ha venido aquí
por arte de encantamento, parécelo, a lo menos; y no como yo, mezquino y
malaventurado, que sólo traigo en mis alforjas un poco de queso, tan duro
que pueden descalabrar con ello a un gigante, a quien hacen compañía cuatro
docenas de algarrobas y otras tantas de avellanas y nueces, mercedes a la
estrecheza de mi dueño, y a la opinión que tiene y orden que guarda de que
los caballeros andantes no se han de mantener y sustentar sino con frutas
secas y con las yerbas del campo.

-Por mi fe, hermano -replicó el del Bosque-, que yo no tengo hecho el
estómago a tagarninas, ni a piruétanos, ni a raíces de los montes. Allá se
lo hayan con sus opiniones y leyes caballerescas nuestros amos, y coman lo
que ellos mandaren. Fiambreras traigo, y esta bota colgando del arzón de la
silla, por sí o por no; y es tan devota mía y quiérola tanto, que pocos
ratos se pasan sin que la dé mil besos y mil abrazos.

Y, diciendo esto, se la puso en las manos a Sancho, el cual, empinándola,
puesta a la boca, estuvo mirando las estrellas un cuarto de hora, y, en
acabando de beber, dejó caer la cabeza a un lado, y, dando un gran suspiro,
dijo:

-¡Oh hideputa bellaco, y cómo es católico!

-¿Veis ahí -dijo el del Bosque, en oyendo el hideputa de Sancho-, cómo
habéis alabado este vino llamándole hideputa?

-Digo -respondió Sancho-, que confieso que conozco que no es deshonra
llamar hijo de puta a nadie, cuando cae debajo del entendimiento de
alabarle. Pero dígame, señor, por el siglo de lo que más quiere: ¿este vino
es de Ciudad Real?

-¡Bravo mojón! -respondió el del Bosque-. En verdad que no es de otra
parte, y que tiene algunos años de ancianidad.

-¡A mí con eso! -dijo Sancho-. No toméis menos, sino que se me fuera a mí
por alto dar alcance a su conocimiento. ¿No será bueno, señor escudero, que
tenga yo un instinto tan grande y tan natural, en esto de conocer vinos,
que, en dándome a oler cualquiera, acierto la patria, el linaje, el sabor,
y la dura, y las vueltas que ha de dar, con todas las circunstancias al
vino atañederas? Pero no hay de qué maravillarse, si tuve en mi linaje por
parte de mi padre los dos más excelentes mojones que en luengos años
conoció la Mancha; para prueba de lo cual les sucedió lo que ahora diré:
«Diéronles a los dos a probar del vino de una cuba, pidiéndoles su parecer
del estado, cualidad, bondad o malicia del vino. El uno lo probó con la
punta de la lengua, el otro no hizo más de llegarlo a las narices. El
primero dijo que aquel vino sabía a hierro, el segundo dijo que más sabía a
cordobán. El dueño dijo que la cuba estaba limpia, y que el tal vino no
tenía adobo alguno por donde hubiese tomado sabor de hierro ni de cordobán.
Con todo eso, los dos famosos mojones se afirmaron en lo que habían dicho.
Anduvo el tiempo, vendióse el vino, y al limpiar de la cuba hallaron en
ella una llave pequeña, pendiente de una correa de cordobán.» Porque vea
vuestra merced si quien viene desta ralea podrá dar su parecer en
semejantes causas.

-Por eso digo -dijo el del Bosque- que nos dejemos de andar buscando
aventuras; y, pues tenemos hogazas, no busquemos tortas, y volvámonos a
nuestras chozas, que allí nos hallará Dios, si Él quiere.

-Hasta que mi amo llegue a Zaragoza, le serviré; que después todos nos
entenderemos.

Finalmente, tanto hablaron y tanto bebieron los dos buenos escuderos, que
tuvo necesidad el sueño de atarles las lenguas y templarles la sed, que
quitársela fuera imposible; y así, asidos entrambos de la ya casi vacía
bota, con los bocados a medio mascar en la boca, se quedaron dormidos,
donde los dejaremos por ahora, por contar lo que el Caballero del Bosque
pasó con el de la Triste Figura.





Capítulo XIV. Donde se prosigue la aventura del Caballero del Bosque


Entre muchas razones que pasaron don Quijote y el Caballero de la Selva,
dice la historia que el del Bosque dijo a don Quijote:

-Finalmente, señor caballero, quiero que sepáis que mi destino, o, por
mejor decir, mi elección, me trujo a enamorar de la sin par Casildea de
Vandalia. Llámola sin par porque no le tiene, así en la grandeza del cuerpo
como en el estremo del estado y de la hermosura. Esta tal Casildea, pues,
que voy contando, pagó mis buenos pensamientos y comedidos deseos con
hacerme ocupar, como su madrina a Hércules, en muchos y diversos peligros,
prometiéndome al fin de cada uno que en el fin del otro llegaría el de mi
esperanza; pero así se han ido eslabonando mis trabajos, que no tienen
cuento, ni yo sé cuál ha de ser el último que dé principio al cumplimiento
de mis buenos deseos. Una vez me mandó que fuese a desafiar a aquella
famosa giganta de Sevilla llamada la Giralda, que es tan valiente y fuerte
como hecha de bronce, y, sin mudarse de un lugar, es la más movible y
voltaria mujer del mundo. Llegué, vila, y vencíla, y hícela estar queda y a
raya, porque en más de una semana no soplaron sino vientos nortes. Vez
también hubo que me mandó fuese a tomar en peso las antiguas piedras de los
valientes Toros de Guisando, empresa más para encomendarse a ganapanes que
a caballeros. Otra vez me mandó que me precipitase y sumiese en la sima de
Cabra, peligro inaudito y temeroso, y que le trujese particular relación de
lo que en aquella escura profundidad se encierra. Detuve el movimiento a la
Giralda, pesé los Toros de Guisando, despeñéme en la sima y saqué a luz lo
escondido de su abismo, y mis esperanzas, muertas que muertas, y sus
mandamientos y desdenes, vivos que vivos. En resolución, últimamente me ha
mandado que discurra por todas las provincias de España y haga confesar a
todos los andantes caballeros que por ellas vagaren que ella sola es la más
aventajada en hermosura de cuantas hoy viven, y que yo soy el más valiente
y el más bien enamorado caballero del orbe; en cuya demanda he andado ya la
mayor parte de España, y en ella he vencido muchos caballeros que se han
atrevido a contradecirme. Pero de lo que yo más me precio y ufano es de
haber vencido, en singular batalla, a aquel tan famoso caballero don
Quijote de la Mancha, y héchole confesar que es más hermosa mi Casildea que
su Dulcinea; y en solo este vencimiento hago cuenta que he vencido todos
los caballeros del mundo, porque el tal don Quijote que digo los ha vencido
a todos; y, habiéndole yo vencido a él, su gloria, su fama y su honra se ha
transferido y pasado a mi persona;

y tanto el vencedor es más honrado,

cuanto más el vencido es reputado;

así que, ya corren por mi cuenta y son mías las inumerables hazañas del ya
referido don Quijote.

Admirado quedó don Quijote de oír al Caballero del Bosque, y estuvo mil
veces por decirle que mentía, y ya tuvo el mentís en el pico de la lengua;
pero reportóse lo mejor que pudo, por hacerle confesar por su propia boca
su mentira; y así, sosegadamente le dijo:

-De que vuesa merced, señor caballero, haya vencido a los más caballeros
andantes de España, y aun de todo el mundo, no digo nada; pero de que haya
vencido a don Quijote de la Mancha, póngolo en duda. Podría ser que fuese
otro que le pareciese, aunque hay pocos que le parezcan.

-¿Cómo no? -replicó el del Bosque-. Por el cielo que nos cubre, que peleé
con don Quijote, y le vencí y rendí; y es un hombre alto de cuerpo, seco de
rostro, estirado y avellanado de miembros, entrecano, la nariz aguileña y
algo corva, de bigotes grandes, negros y caídos. Campea debajo del nombre
del Caballero de la Triste Figura, y trae por escudero a un labrador
llamado Sancho Panza; oprime el lomo y rige el freno de un famoso caballo
llamado Rocinante, y, finalmente, tiene por señora de su voluntad a una tal
Dulcinea del Toboso, llamada un tiempo Aldonza Lorenzo; como la mía, que,
por llamarse Casilda y ser de la Andalucía, yo la llamo Casildea de
Vandalia. Si todas estas señas no bastan para acreditar mi verdad, aquí
está mi espada, que la hará dar crédito a la mesma incredulidad.

-Sosegaos, señor caballero -dijo don Quijote-, y escuchad lo que decir os
quiero. Habéis de saber que ese don Quijote que decís es el mayor amigo que
en este mundo tengo, y tanto, que podré decir que le tengo en lugar de mi
misma persona, y que por las señas que dél me habéis dado, tan puntuales y
ciertas, no puedo pensar sino que sea el mismo que habéis vencido. Por otra
parte, veo con los ojos y toco con las manos no ser posible ser el mesmo,
si ya no fuese que como él tiene muchos enemigos encantadores,
especialmente uno que de ordinario le persigue, no haya alguno dellos
tomado su figura para dejarse vencer, por defraudarle de la fama que sus
altas caballerías le tienen granjeada y adquirida por todo lo descubierto
de la tierra. Y, para confirmación desto, quiero también que sepáis que los
tales encantadores sus contrarios no ha más de dos días que transformaron
la figura y persona de la hermosa Dulcinea del Toboso en una aldeana soez y
baja, y desta manera habrán transformado a don Quijote; y si todo esto no
basta para enteraros en esta verdad que digo, aquí está el mesmo don
Quijote, que la sustentará con sus armas a pie, o a caballo, o de
cualquiera suerte que os agradare.

Y, diciendo esto, se levantó en pie y se empuñó en la espada, esperando qué
resolución tomaría el Caballero del Bosque; el cual, con voz asimismo
sosegada, respondió y dijo:

-Al buen pagador no le duelen prendas: el que una vez, señor don Quijote,
pudo venceros transformado, bien podrá tener esperanza de rendiros en
vuestro propio ser. Mas, porque no es bien que los caballeros hagan sus
fechos de armas ascuras, como los salteadores y rufianes, esperemos el día,
para que el sol vea nuestras obras. Y ha de ser condición de nuestra
batalla que el vencido ha de quedar a la voluntad del vencedor, para que
haga dél todo lo que quisiere, con tal que sea decente a caballero lo que
se le ordenare.

-Soy más que contento desa condición y convenencia -respondió don Quijote.

Y, en diciendo esto, se fueron donde estaban sus escuderos, y los hallaron
roncando y en la misma forma que estaban cuando les salteó el sueño.
Despertáronlos y mandáronles que tuviesen a punto los caballos, porque, en
saliendo el sol, habían de hacer los dos una sangrienta, singular y
desigual batalla; a cuyas nuevas quedó Sancho atónito y pasmado, temeroso
de la salud de su amo, por las valentías que había oído decir del suyo al
escudero del Bosque; pero, sin hablar palabra, se fueron los dos escuderos
a buscar su ganado, que ya todos tres caballos y el rucio se habían olido,
y estaban todos juntos.

En el camino dijo el del Bosque a Sancho:

-Ha de saber, hermano, que tienen por costumbre los peleantes de la
Andalucía, cuando son padrinos de alguna pendencia, no estarse ociosos mano
sobre mano en tanto que sus ahijados riñen. Dígolo porque esté advertido
que mientras nuestros dueños riñeren, nosotros también hemos de pelear y
hacernos astillas.

-Esa costumbre, señor escudero -respondió Sancho-, allá puede correr y
pasar con los rufianes y peleantes que dice, pero con los escuderos de los
caballeros andantes, ni por pienso. A lo menos, yo no he oído decir a mi
amo semejante costumbre, y sabe de memoria todas las ordenanzas de la
andante caballería. Cuanto más, que yo quiero que sea verdad y ordenanza
expresa el pelear los escuderos en tanto que sus señores pelean; pero yo no
quiero cumplirla, sino pagar la pena que estuviere puesta a los tales
pacíficos escuderos, que yo aseguro que no pase de dos libras de cera, y
más quiero pagar las tales libras, que sé que me costarán menos que las
hilas que podré gastar en curarme la cabeza, que ya me la cuento por
partida y dividida en dos partes. Hay más: que me imposibilita el reñir el
no tener espada, pues en mi vida me la puse.

-Para eso sé yo un buen remedio -dijo el del Bosque-: yo traigo aquí dos
talegas de lienzo, de un mesmo tamaño: tomaréis vos la una, y yo la otra, y
riñiremos a talegazos, con armas iguales.

-Desa manera, sea en buena hora -respondió Sancho-, porque antes servirá la
tal pelea de despolvorearnos que de herirnos.

-No ha de ser así -replicó el otro-, porque se han de echar dentro de las
talegas, porque no se las lleve el aire, media docena de guijarros lindos y
pelados, que pesen tanto los unos como los otros, y desta manera nos
podremos atalegar sin hacernos mal ni daño.

-¡Mirad, cuerpo de mi padre -respondió Sancho-, qué martas cebollinas, o
qué copos de algodón cardado pone en las talegas, para no quedar molidos
los cascos y hechos alheña los huesos! Pero, aunque se llenaran de capullos
de seda, sepa, señor mío, que no he de pelear: peleen nuestros amos, y allá
se lo hayan, y bebamos y vivamos nosotros, que el tiempo tiene cuidado de
quitarnos las vidas, sin que andemos buscando apetites para que se acaben
antes de llegar su sazón y término y que se cayan de maduras.

-Con todo -replicó el del Bosque-, hemos de pelear siquiera media hora.

-Eso no -respondió Sancho-: no seré yo tan descortés ni tan desagradecido,
que con quien he comido y he bebido trabe cuestión alguna, por mínima que
sea; cuanto más que, estando sin cólera y sin enojo, ¿quién diablos se ha
de amañar a reñir a secas?

-Para eso -dijo el del Bosque- yo daré un suficiente remedio: y es que,
antes que comencemos la pelea, yo me llegaré bonitamente a vuestra merced
y le daré tres o cuatro bofetadas, que dé con él a mis pies, con las cuales
le haré despertar la cólera, aunque esté con más sueño que un lirón.

-Contra ese corte sé yo otro -respondió Sancho-, que no le va en zaga:
cogeré yo un garrote, y, antes que vuestra merced llegue a despertarme la
cólera, haré yo dormir a garrotazos de tal suerte la suya, que no despierte
si no fuere en el otro mundo, en el cual se sabe que no soy yo hombre que
me dejo manosear el rostro de nadie; y cada uno mire por el virote, aunque
lo más acertado sería dejar dormir su cólera a cada uno, que no sabe nadie
el alma de nadie, y tal suele venir por lana que vuelve tresquilado; y Dios
bendijo la paz y maldijo las riñas, porque si un gato acosado, encerrado y
apretado se vuelve en león, yo, que soy hombre, Dios sabe en lo que podré
volverme; y así, desde ahora intimo a vuestra merced, señor escudero, que
corra por su cuenta todo el mal y daño que de nuestra pendencia resultare.

-Está bien -replicó el del Bosque-. Amanecerá Dios y medraremos.

En esto, ya comenzaban a gorjear en los árboles mil suertes de pintados
pajarillos, y en sus diversos y alegres cantos parecía que daban la
norabuena y saludaban a la fresca aurora, que ya por las puertas y balcones
del oriente iba descubriendo la hermosura de su rostro, sacudiendo de sus
cabellos un número infinito de líquidas perlas, en cuyo suave licor
bañándose las yerbas, parecía asimesmo que ellas brotaban y llovían
blanco y menudo aljófar; los sauces destilaban maná sabroso, reíanse las
fuentes, murmuraban los arroyos, alegrábanse las selvas y enriquecíanse los
prados con su venida. Mas, apenas dio lugar la claridad del día para ver y
diferenciar las cosas, cuando la primera que se ofreció a los ojos de
Sancho Panza fue la nariz del escudero del Bosque, que era tan grande que
casi le hacía sombra a todo el cuerpo. Cuéntase, en efecto, que era de
demasiada grandeza, corva en la mitad y toda llena de verrugas, de color
amoratado, como de berenjena; bajábale dos dedos más abajo de la boca; cuya
grandeza, color, verrugas y encorvamiento así le afeaban el rostro, que, en
viéndole Sancho, comenzó a herir de pie y de mano, como niño con alferecía,
y propuso en su corazón de dejarse dar docientas bofetadas antes que
despertar la cólera para reñir con aquel vestiglo.

Don Quijote miró a su contendor, y hallóle ya puesta y calada la celada, de
modo que no le pudo ver el rostro, pero notó que era hombre membrudo, y no
muy alto de cuerpo. Sobre las armas traía una sobrevista o casaca de una
tela, al parecer, de oro finísimo, sembradas por ella muchas lunas pequeñas
de resplandecientes espejos, que le hacían en grandísima manera galán y
vistoso; volábanle sobre la celada grande cantidad de plumas verdes,
amarillas y blancas; la lanza, que tenía arrimada a un árbol, era
grandísima y gruesa, y de un hierro acerado de más de un palmo.

Todo lo miró y todo lo notó don Quijote, y juzgó de lo visto y mirado que
el ya dicho caballero debía de ser de grandes fuerzas; pero no por eso
temió, como Sancho Panza; antes, con gentil denuedo, dijo al Caballero de
los Espejos:

-Si la mucha gana de pelear, señor caballero, no os gasta la cortesía, por
ella os pido que alcéis la visera un poco, porque yo vea si la gallardía de
vuestro rostro responde a la de vuestra disposición.

-O vencido o vencedor que salgáis desta empresa, señor caballero -respondió
el de los Espejos-, os quedará tiempo y espacio demasiado para verme; y si
ahora no satisfago a vuestro deseo, es por parecerme que hago notable
agravio a la hermosa Casildea de Vandalia en dilatar el tiempo que tardare
en alzarme la visera, sin haceros confesar lo que ya sabéis que pretendo.

-Pues, en tanto que subimos a caballo -dijo don Quijote-, bien podéis
decirme si soy yo aquel don Quijote que dijistes haber vencido.

-A eso vos respondemos -dijo el de los Espejos- que parecéis, como se
parece un huevo a otro, al mismo caballero que yo vencí; pero, según vos
decís que le persiguen encantadores, no osaré afirmar si sois el contenido
o no.

-Eso me basta a mí -respondió don Quijote- para que crea vuestro engaño;
empero, para sacaros dél de todo punto, vengan nuestros caballos; que, en
menos tiempo que el que tardárades en alzaros la visera, si Dios, si mi
señora y mi brazo me valen, veré yo vuestro rostro, y vos veréis que no soy
yo el vencido don Quijote que pensáis.

Con esto, acortando razones, subieron a caballo, y don Quijote volvió las
riendas a Rocinante para tomar lo que convenía del campo, para volver a
encontrar a su contrario, y lo mesmo hizo el de los Espejos. Pero, no se
había apartado don Quijote veinte pasos, cuando se oyó llamar del de los
Espejos, y, partiendo los dos el camino, el de los Espejos le dijo:

-Advertid, señor caballero, que la condición de nuestra batalla es que el
vencido, como otra vez he dicho, ha de quedar a discreción del vencedor.

-Ya la sé -respondió don Quijote-; con tal que lo que se le impusiere y
mandare al vencido han de ser cosas que no salgan de los límites de la
caballería.

-Así se entiende -respondió el de los Espejos.

Ofreciéronsele en esto a la vista de don Quijote las estrañas narices del
escudero, y no se admiró menos de verlas que Sancho; tanto, que le juzgó
por algún monstro, o por hombre nuevo y de aquellos que no se usan en el
mundo. Sancho, que vio partir a su amo para tomar carrera, no quiso quedar
solo con el narigudo, temiendo que con solo un pasagonzalo con aquellas
narices en las suyas sería acabada la pendencia suya, quedando del golpe, o
del miedo, tendido en el suelo, y fuese tras su amo, asido a una acción de
Rocinante; y, cuando le pareció que ya era tiempo que volviese, le dijo:

-Suplico a vuesa merced, señor mío, que antes que vuelva a encontrarse me
ayude a subir sobre aquel alcornoque, de donde podré ver más a mi sabor,
mejor que desde el suelo, el gallardo encuentro que vuesa merced ha de
hacer con este caballero.

-Antes creo, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que te quieres encaramar y subir en
andamio por ver sin peligro los toros.

-La verdad que diga -respondió Sancho-, las desaforadas narices de aquel
escudero me tienen atónito y lleno de espanto, y no me atrevo a estar junto
a él.

-Ellas son tales -dijo don Quijote-, que, a no ser yo quien soy, también me
asombraran; y así, ven: ayudarte he a subir donde dices.

En lo que se detuvo don Quijote en que Sancho subiese en el alcornoque,
tomó el de los Espejos del campo lo que le pareció necesario; y, creyendo
que lo mismo habría hecho don Quijote, sin esperar son de trompeta ni otra
señal que los avisase, volvió las riendas a su caballo -que no era más
ligero ni de mejor parecer que Rocinante-, y, a todo su correr, que era un
mediano trote, iba a encontrar a su enemigo; pero, viéndole ocupado en la
subida de Sancho, detuvo las riendas y paróse en la mitad de la carrera, de
lo que el caballo quedó agradecidísimo, a causa que ya no podía moverse.
Don Quijote, que le pareció que ya su enemigo venía volando, arrimó
reciamente las espuelas a las trasijadas ijadas de Rocinante, y le hizo
aguijar de manera, que cuenta la historia que esta sola vez se conoció
haber corrido algo, porque todas las demás siempre fueron trotes
declarados; y con esta no vista furia llegó donde el de los Espejos estaba
hincando a su caballo las espuelas hasta los botones, sin que le pudiese
mover un solo dedo del lugar donde había hecho estanco de su carrera.

En esta buena sazón y coyuntura halló don Quijote a su contrario embarazado
con su caballo y ocupado con su lanza, que nunca, o no acertó, o no tuvo
lugar de ponerla en ristre. Don Quijote, que no miraba en estos
inconvenientes, a salvamano y sin peligro alguno, encontró al de los
Espejos con tanta fuerza, que mal de su grado le hizo venir al suelo por
las ancas del caballo, dando tal caída, que, sin mover pie ni mano, dio
señales de que estaba muerto.

Apenas le vio caído Sancho, cuando se deslizó del alcornoque y a toda
priesa vino donde su señor estaba, el cual, apeándose de Rocinante, fue
sobre el de los Espejos, y, quitándole las lazadas del yelmo para ver si
era muerto y para que le diese el aire si acaso estaba vivo; y vio...
¿Quién podrá decir lo que vio, sin causar admiración, maravilla y espanto a
los que lo oyeren? Vio, dice la historia, el rostro mesmo, la misma figura,
el mesmo aspecto, la misma fisonomía, la mesma efigie, la pespetiva mesma
del bachiller Sansón Carrasco; y, así como la vio, en altas voces dijo:

-¡Acude, Sancho, y mira lo que has de ver y no lo has creer! ¡Aguija, hijo,
y advierte lo que puede la magia, lo que pueden los hechiceros y los
encantadores!

Llegó Sancho, y, como vio el rostro del bachiller Carrasco, comenzó a
hacerse mil cruces y a santiguarse otras tantas. En todo esto, no daba
muestras de estar vivo el derribado caballero, y Sancho dijo a don Quijote:

-Soy de parecer, señor mío, que, por sí o por no, vuesa merced hinque y
meta la espada por la boca a este que parece el bachiller Sansón Carrasco;
quizá matará en él a alguno de sus enemigos los encantadores.

-No dices mal -dijo don Quijote-, porque de los enemigos, los menos.

Y, sacando la espada para poner en efecto el aviso y consejo de Sancho,
llegó el escudero del de los Espejos, ya sin las narices que tan feo le
habían hecho, y a grandes voces dijo:

-Mire vuesa merced lo que hace, señor don Quijote, que ese que tiene a los
pies es el bachiller Sansón Carrasco, su amigo, y yo soy su escudero.

Y, viéndole Sancho sin aquella fealdad primera, le dijo:

-¿Y las narices?

A lo que él respondió:

-Aquí las tengo, en la faldriquera.

Y, echando mano a la derecha, sacó unas narices de pasta y barniz, de
máscara, de la manifatura que quedan delineadas. Y, mirándole más y más
Sancho, con voz admirativa y grande, dijo:

-¡Santa María, y valme! ¿Éste no es Tomé Cecial, mi vecino y mi compadre?

-Y ¡cómo si lo soy! -respondió el ya desnarigado escudero-: Tomé Cecial
soy, compadre y amigo Sancho Panza, y luego os diré los arcaduces, embustes
y enredos por donde soy aquí venido; y en tanto, pedid y suplicad al señor
vuestro amo que no toque, maltrate, hiera ni mate al caballero de los
Espejos, que a sus pies tiene, porque sin duda alguna es el atrevido y mal
aconsejado del bachiller Sansón Carrasco, nuestro compatrioto.

En esto, volvió en sí el de los Espejos, lo cual visto por don Quijote, le
puso la punta desnuda de su espada encima del rostro, y le dijo:

-Muerto sois, caballero, si no confesáis que la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso
se aventaja en belleza a vuestra Casildea de Vandalia; y demás de esto
habéis de prometer, si de esta contienda y caída quedárades con vida, de ir
a la ciudad del Toboso y presentaros en su presencia de mi parte, para que
haga de vos lo que más en voluntad le viniere; y si os dejare en la
vuestra, asimismo habéis de volver a buscarme, que el rastro de mis hazañas
os servirá de guía que os traiga donde yo estuviere, y a decirme lo que con
ella hubiéredes pasado; condiciones que, conforme a las que pusimos antes
de nuestra batalla, no salen de los términos de la andante caballería.

-Confieso -dijo el caído caballero- que vale más el zapato descosido y
sucio de la señora Dulcinea del Toboso que las barbas mal peinadas, aunque
limpias, de Casildea, y prometo de ir y volver de su presencia a la
vuestra, y daros entera y particular cuenta de lo que me pedís.

-También habéis de confesar y creer -añadió don Quijote- que aquel
caballero que vencistes no fue ni pudo ser don Quijote de la Mancha, sino
otro que se le parecía, como yo confieso y creo que vos, aunque parecéis el
bachiller Sansón Carrasco, no lo sois, sino otro que le parece, y que en su
figura aquí me le han puesto mis enemigos, para que detenga y temple el
ímpetu de mi cólera, y para que use blandamente de la gloria del
vencimiento.

-Todo lo confieso, juzgo y siento como vos lo creéis, juzgáis y sentís
-respondió el derrengado caballero-. Dejadme levantar, os ruego, si es que
lo permite el golpe de mi caída, que asaz maltrecho me tiene.

Ayudóle a levantar don Quijote y Tomé Cecial, su escudero, del cual no
apartaba los ojos Sancho, preguntándole cosas cuyas respuestas le daban
manifiestas señales de que verdaderamente era el Tomé Cecial que decía; mas
la aprehensión que en Sancho había hecho lo que su amo dijo, de que los
encantadores habían mudado la figura del Caballero de los Espejos en la del
bachiller Carrasco, no le dejaba dar crédito a la verdad que con los ojos
estaba mirando. Finalmente, se quedaron con este engaño amo y mozo, y el de
los Espejos y su escudero, mohínos y malandantes, se apartaron de don
Quijote y Sancho, con intención de buscar algún lugar donde bizmarle y
entablarle las costillas. Don Quijote y Sancho volvieron a proseguir su
camino de Zaragoza, donde los deja la historia, por dar cuenta de quién era
el Caballero de los Espejos y su narigante escudero.





Capítulo XV. Donde se cuenta y da noticia de quién era el Caballero de los
Espejos y su escudero


En estremo contento, ufano y vanaglorioso iba don Quijote por haber
alcanzado vitoria de tan valiente caballero como él se imaginaba que era el
de los Espejos, de cuya caballeresca palabra esperaba saber si el
encantamento de su señora pasaba adelante, pues era forzoso que el tal
vencido caballero volviese, so pena de no serlo, a darle razón de lo que
con ella le hubiese sucedido. Pero uno pensaba don Quijote y otro el de los
Espejos, puesto que por entonces no era otro su pensamiento sino buscar
donde bizmarse, como se ha dicho.

Dice, pues, la historia que cuando el bachiller Sansón Carrasco aconsejó a
don Quijote que volviese a proseguir sus dejadas caballerías, fue por haber
entrado primero en bureo con el cura y el barbero sobre qué medio se podría
tomar para reducir a don Quijote a que se estuviese en su casa quieto y
sosegado, sin que le alborotasen sus mal buscadas aventuras; de cuyo
consejo salió, por voto común de todos y parecer particular de Carrasco,
que dejasen salir a don Quijote, pues el detenerle parecía imposible, y que
Sansón le saliese al camino como caballero andante, y trabase batalla con
él, pues no faltaría sobre qué, y le venciese, teniéndolo por cosa fácil, y
que fuese pacto y concierto que el vencido quedase a merced del vencedor; y
así vencido don Quijote, le había de mandar el bachiller caballero se
volviese a su pueblo y casa, y no saliese della en dos años, o hasta tanto
que por él le fuese mandado otra cosa; lo cual era claro que don Quijote
vencido cumpliría indubitablemente, por no contravenir y faltar a las leyes
de la caballería, y podría ser que en el tiempo de su reclusión se le
olvidasen sus vanidades, o se diese lugar de buscar a su locura algún
conveniente remedio.

Aceptólo Carrasco, y ofreciósele por escudero Tomé Cecial, compadre y
vecino de Sancho Panza, hombre alegre y de lucios cascos. Armóse Sansón
como queda referido y Tomé Cecial acomodó sobre sus naturales narices las
falsas y de máscara ya dichas, porque no fuese conocido de su compadre
cuando se viesen; y así, siguieron el mismo viaje que llevaba don Quijote,
y llegaron casi a hallarse en la aventura del carro de la Muerte. Y,
finalmente, dieron con ellos en el bosque, donde les sucedió todo lo que el
prudente ha leído; y si no fuera por los pensamientos extraordinarios de
don Quijote, que se dio a entender que el bachiller no era el bachiller, el
señor bachiller quedara imposibilitado para siempre de graduarse de
licenciado, por no haber hallado nidos donde pensó hallar pájaros.

Tomé Cecial, que vio cuán mal había logrado sus deseos y el mal paradero
que había tenido su camino, dijo al bachiller:

-Por cierto, señor Sansón Carrasco, que tenemos nuestro merecido: con
facilidad se piensa y se acomete una empresa, pero con dificultad las más
veces se sale della. Don Quijote loco, nosotros cuerdos: él se va sano y
riendo, vuesa merced queda molido y triste. Sepamos, pues, ahora, cuál es
más loco: ¿el que lo es por no poder menos, o el que lo es por su voluntad?

A lo que respondió Sansón:

-La diferencia que hay entre esos dos locos es que el que lo es por fuerza
lo será siempre, y el que lo es de grado lo dejará de ser cuando quisiere.

-Pues así es -dijo Tomé Cecial-, yo fui por mi voluntad loco cuando quise
hacerme escudero de vuestra merced, y por la misma quiero dejar de serlo y
volverme a mi casa.

-Eso os cumple -respondió Sansón-, porque pensar que yo he de volver a la
mía, hasta haber molido a palos a don Quijote, es pensar en lo escusado; y
no me llevará ahora a buscarle el deseo de que cobre su juicio, sino el de
la venganza; que el dolor grande de mis costillas no me deja hacer más
piadosos discursos.

En esto fueron razonando los dos, hasta que llegaron a un pueblo donde fue
ventura hallar un algebrista, con quien se curó el Sansón desgraciado. Tomé
Cecial se volvió y le dejó, y él quedó imaginando su venganza; y la
historia vuelve a hablar dél a su tiempo, por no dejar de regocijarse ahora
con don Quijote.





Capítulo XVI. De lo que sucedió a don Quijote con un discreto caballero de
la Mancha


Con la alegría, contento y ufanidad que se ha dicho, seguía don Quijote su
jornada, imaginándose por la pasada vitoria ser el caballero andante más
valiente que tenía en aquella edad el mundo; daba por acabadas y a felice
fin conducidas cuantas aventuras pudiesen sucederle de allí adelante; tenía
en poco a los encantos y a los encantadores; no se acordaba de los
inumerables palos que en el discurso de sus caballerías le habían dado, ni
de la pedrada que le derribó la mitad de los dientes, ni del
desagradecimiento de los galeotes, ni del atrevimiento y lluvia de estacas
de los yangüeses. Finalmente, decía entre sí que si él hallara arte, modo o
manera como desencantar a su señora Dulcinea, no invidiara a la mayor
ventura que alcanzó o pudo alcanzar el más venturoso caballero andante de
los pasados siglos. En estas imaginaciones iba todo ocupado, cuando Sancho
le dijo:

-¿No es bueno, señor, que aun todavía traigo entre los ojos las desaforadas
narices, y mayores de marca, de mi compadre Tomé Cecial?

-Y ¿crees tú, Sancho, por ventura, que el Caballero de los Espejos era el
bachiller Carrasco; y su escudero, Tomé Cecial, tu compadre?

-No sé qué me diga a eso -respondió Sancho-; sólo sé que las señas que me
dio de mi casa, mujer y hijos no me las podría dar otro que él mesmo; y la
cara, quitadas las narices, era la misma de Tomé Cecial, como yo se la he
visto muchas veces en mi pueblo y pared en medio de mi misma casa; y el
tono de la habla era todo uno.

-Estemos a razón, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-. Ven acá: ¿en qué
consideración puede caber que el bachiller Sansón Carrasco viniese como
caballero andante, armado de armas ofensivas y defensivas, a pelear
conmigo? ¿He sido yo su enemigo por ventura? ¿Hele dado yo jamás ocasión
para tenerme ojeriza? ¿Soy yo su rival, o hace él profesión de las armas,
para tener invidia a la fama que yo por ellas he ganado?

-Pues, ¿qué diremos, señor -respondió Sancho-, a esto de parecerse tanto
aquel caballero, sea el que se fuere, al bachiller Carrasco, y su escudero
a Tomé Cecial, mi compadre? Y si ello es encantamento, como vuestra merced
ha dicho, ¿no había en el mundo otros dos a quien se parecieran?

-Todo es artificio y traza -respondió don Quijote- de los malignos magos
que me persiguen, los cuales, anteviendo que yo había de quedar vencedor en
la contienda, se previnieron de que el caballero vencido mostrase el rostro
de mi amigo el bachiller, porque la amistad que le tengo se pusiese entre
los filos de mi espada y el rigor de mi brazo, y templase la justa ira de
mi corazón, y desta manera quedase con vida el que con embelecos y falsías
procuraba quitarme la mía. Para prueba de lo cual ya sabes, ¡oh Sancho!,
por experiencia que no te dejará mentir ni engañar, cuán fácil sea a los
encantadores mudar unos rostros en otros, haciendo de lo hermoso feo y de
lo feo hermoso, pues no ha dos días que viste por tus mismos ojos la
hermosura y gallardía de la sin par Dulcinea en toda su entereza y natural
conformidad, y yo la vi en la fealdad y bajeza de una zafia labradora, con
cataratas en los ojos y con mal olor en la boca; y más, que el perverso
encantador que se atrevió a hacer una transformación tan mala no es mucho
que haya hecho la de Sansón Carrasco y la de tu compadre, por quitarme la
gloria del vencimiento de las manos. Pero, con todo esto, me consuelo;
porque, en fin, en cualquiera figura que haya sido, he quedado vencedor de
mi enemigo.

-Dios sabe la verdad de todo -respondió Sancho.

Y como él sabía que la transformación de Dulcinea había sido traza y
embeleco suyo, no le satisfacían las quimeras de su amo; pero no le quiso
replicar, por no decir alguna palabra que descubriese su embuste.

En estas razones estaban cuando los alcanzó un hombre que detrás dellos por
el mismo camino venía sobre una muy hermosa yegua tordilla, vestido un
gabán de paño fino verde, jironado de terciopelo leonado, con una montera
del mismo terciopelo; el aderezo de la yegua era de campo y de la jineta,
asimismo de morado y verde. Traía un alfanje morisco pendiente de un ancho
tahalí de verde y oro, y los borceguíes eran de la labor del tahalí; las
espuelas no eran doradas, sino dadas con un barniz verde, tan tersas y
bruñidas que, por hacer labor con todo el vestido, parecían mejor que si
fuera de oro puro. Cuando llegó a ellos, el caminante los saludó
cortésmente, y, picando a la yegua, se pasaba de largo; pero don Quijote le
dijo:

-Señor galán, si es que vuestra merced lleva el camino que nosotros y no
importa el darse priesa, merced recibiría en que nos fuésemos juntos.

-En verdad -respondió el de la yegua- que no me pasara tan de largo, si no
fuera por temor que con la compañía de mi yegua no se alborotara ese
caballo.

-Bien puede, señor -respondió a esta sazón Sancho-, bien puede tener las
riendas a su yegua, porque nuestro caballo es el más honesto y bien mirado
del mundo: jamás en semejantes ocasiones ha hecho vileza alguna, y una vez
que se desmandó a hacerla la lastamos mi señor y yo con las setenas. Digo
otra vez que puede vuestra merced detenerse, si quisiere; que, aunque se la
den entre dos platos, a buen seguro que el caballo no la arrostre.

Detuvo la rienda el caminante, admirándose de la apostura y rostro de don
Quijote, el cual iba sin celada, que la llevaba Sancho como maleta en el
arzón delantero de la albarda del rucio; y si mucho miraba el de lo verde a
don Quijote, mucho más miraba don Quijote al de lo verde, pareciéndole
hombre de chapa. La edad mostraba ser de cincuenta años; las canas, pocas,
y el rostro, aguileño; la vista, entre alegre y grave; finalmente, en el
traje y apostura daba a entender ser hombre de buenas prendas.

Lo que juzgó de don Quijote de la Mancha el de lo verde fue que semejante
manera ni parecer de hombre no le había visto jamás: admiróle la longura de
su caballo, la grandeza de su cuerpo, la flaqueza y amarillez de su rostro,
sus armas, su ademán y compostura: figura y retrato no visto por luengos
tiempos atrás en aquella tierra. Notó bien don Quijote la atención con que
el caminante le miraba, y leyóle en la suspensión su deseo; y, como era tan
cortés y tan amigo de dar gusto a todos, antes que le preguntase nada, le
salió al camino, diciéndole:

-Esta figura que vuesa merced en mí ha visto, por ser tan nueva y tan fuera
de las que comúnmente se usan, no me maravillaría yo de que le hubiese
maravillado; pero dejará vuesa merced de estarlo cuando le diga, como le
digo, que soy caballero

destos que dicen las gentes

que a sus aventuras van.

Salí de mi patria, empeñé mi hacienda, dejé mi regalo, y entreguéme en los
brazos de la Fortuna, que me llevasen donde más fuese servida. Quise
resucitar la ya muerta andante caballería, y ha muchos días que, tropezando
aquí, cayendo allí, despeñándome acá y levantándome acullá, he cumplido
gran parte de mi deseo, socorriendo viudas, amparando doncellas y
favoreciendo casadas, huérfanos y pupilos, propio y natural oficio de
caballeros andantes; y así, por mis valerosas, muchas y cristianas hazañas
he merecido andar ya en estampa en casi todas o las más naciones del mundo.
Treinta mil volúmenes se han impreso de mi historia, y lleva camino de
imprimirse treinta mil veces de millares, si el cielo no lo remedia.
Finalmente, por encerrarlo todo en breves palabras, o en una sola, digo que
yo soy don Quijote de la Mancha, por otro nombre llamado el Caballero de la
Triste Figura; y, puesto que las propias alabanzas envilecen, esme forzoso
decir yo tal vez las mías, y esto se entiende cuando no se halla presente
quien las diga; así que, señor gentilhombre, ni este caballo, esta lanza,
ni este escudo, ni escudero, ni todas juntas estas armas, ni la amarillez
de mi rostro, ni mi atenuada flaqueza, os podrá admirar de aquí adelante,
habiendo ya sabido quién soy y la profesión que hago.

Calló en diciendo esto don Quijote, y el de lo verde, según se tardaba en
responderle, parecía que no acertaba a hacerlo; pero de allí a buen espacio
le dijo:

-Acertastes, señor caballero, a conocer por mi suspensión mi deseo; pero no
habéis acertado a quitarme la maravilla que en mí causa el haberos visto;
que, puesto que, como vos, señor, decís, que el saber ya quién sois me lo
podría quitar, no ha sido así; antes, agora que lo sé, quedo más suspenso y
maravillado. ¿Cómo y es posible que hay hoy caballeros andantes en el
mundo, y que hay historias impresas de verdaderas caballerías? No me puedo
persuadir que haya hoy en la tierra quien favorezca viudas, ampare
doncellas, ni honre casadas, ni socorra huérfanos, y no lo creyera si en
vuesa merced no lo hubiera visto con mis ojos. ¡Bendito sea el cielo!, que
con esa historia, que vuesa merced dice que está impresa, de sus altas y
verdaderas caballerías, se habrán puesto en olvido las innumerables de los
fingidos caballeros andantes, de que estaba lleno el mundo, tan en daño de
las buenas costumbres y tan en perjuicio y descrédito de las buenas
historias.

-Hay mucho que decir -respondió don Quijote- en razón de si son fingidas, o
no, las historias de los andantes caballeros.

-Pues, ¿hay quien dude -respondió el Verde- que no son falsas las tales
historias?

-Yo lo dudo -respondió don Quijote-, y quédese esto aquí; que si nuestra
jornada dura, espero en Dios de dar a entender a vuesa merced que ha hecho
mal en irse con la corriente de los que tienen por cierto que no son
verdaderas.

Desta última razón de don Quijote tomó barruntos el caminante de que don
Quijote debía de ser algún mentecato, y aguardaba que con otras lo
confirmase; pero, antes que se divertiesen en otros razonamientos, don
Quijote le rogó le dijese quién era, pues él le había dado parte de su
condición y de su vida. A lo que respondió el del Verde Gabán:

-Yo, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, soy un hidalgo natural de un
lugar donde iremos a comer hoy, si Dios fuere servido. Soy más que
medianamente rico y es mi nombre don Diego de Miranda; paso la vida con mi
mujer, y con mis hijos, y con mis amigos; mis ejercicios son el de la caza
y pesca, pero no mantengo ni halcón ni galgos, sino algún perdigón manso, o
algún hurón atrevido. Tengo hasta seis docenas de libros, cuáles de romance
y cuáles de latín, de historia algunos y de devoción otros; los de
caballerías aún no han entrado por los umbrales de mis puertas. Hojeo más
los que son profanos que los devotos, como sean de honesto entretenimiento,
que deleiten con el lenguaje y admiren y suspendan con la invención, puesto
que déstos hay muy pocos en España. Alguna vez como con mis vecinos y
amigos, y muchas veces los convido; son mis convites limpios y aseados, y
no nada escasos; ni gusto de murmurar, ni consiento que delante de mí se
murmure; no escudriño las vidas ajenas, ni soy lince de los hechos de los
otros; oigo misa cada día; reparto de mis bienes con los pobres, sin hacer
alarde de las buenas obras, por no dar entrada en mi corazón a la
hipocresía y vanagloria, enemigos que blandamente se apoderan del corazón
más recatado; procuro poner en paz los que sé que están desavenidos; soy
devoto de nuestra Señora, y confío siempre en la misericordia infinita de
Dios nuestro Señor.

Atentísimo estuvo Sancho a la relación de la vida y entretenimientos del
hidalgo; y, pareciéndole buena y santa y que quien la hacía debía de hacer
milagros, se arrojó del rucio, y con gran priesa le fue a asir del estribo
derecho, y con devoto corazón y casi lágrimas le besó los pies una y muchas
veces. Visto lo cual por el hidalgo, le preguntó:

-¿Qué hacéis, hermano? ¿Qué besos son éstos?

-Déjenme besar -respondió Sancho-, porque me parece vuesa merced el primer
santo a la jineta que he visto en todos los días de mi vida.

-No soy santo -respondió el hidalgo-, sino gran pecador; vos sí, hermano,
que debéis de ser bueno, como vuestra simplicidad lo muestra.

Volvió Sancho a cobrar la albarda, habiendo sacado a plaza la risa de la
profunda malencolía de su amo y causado nueva admiración a don Diego.
Preguntóle don Quijote que cuántos hijos tenía, y díjole que una de las
cosas en que ponían el sumo bien los antiguos filósofos, que carecieron del
verdadero conocimiento de Dios, fue en los bienes de la naturaleza, en los
de la fortuna, en tener muchos amigos y en tener muchos y buenos hijos.

-Yo, señor don Quijote -respondió el hidalgo-, tengo un hijo, que, a no
tenerle, quizá me juzgara por más dichoso de lo que soy; y no porque él sea
malo, sino porque no es tan bueno como yo quisiera. Será de edad de diez y
ocho años: los seis ha estado en Salamanca, aprendiendo las lenguas latina
y griega; y, cuando quise que pasase a estudiar otras ciencias, halléle tan
embebido en la de la poesía, si es que se puede llamar ciencia, que no es
posible hacerle arrostrar la de las leyes, que yo quisiera que estudiara,
ni de la reina de todas, la teología. Quisiera yo que fuera corona de su
linaje, pues vivimos en siglo donde nuestros reyes premian altamente las
virtuosas y buenas letras; porque letras sin virtud son perlas en el
muladar. Todo el día se le pasa en averiguar si dijo bien o mal Homero en
tal verso de la Ilíada; si Marcial anduvo deshonesto, o no, en tal
epigrama; si se han de entender de una manera o otra tales y tales versos
de Virgilio. En fin, todas sus conversaciones son con los libros de los
referidos poetas, y con los de Horacio, Persio, Juvenal y Tibulo; que de
los modernos romancistas no hace mucha cuenta; y, con todo el mal cariño
que muestra tener a la poesía de romance, le tiene agora desvanecidos los
pensamientos el hacer una glosa a cuatro versos que le han enviado de
Salamanca, y pienso que son de justa literaria.

A todo lo cual respondió don Quijote:

-Los hijos, señor, son pedazos de las entrañas de sus padres, y así, se han
de querer, o buenos o malos que sean, como se quieren las almas que nos dan
vida; a los padres toca el encaminarlos desde pequeños por los pasos de la
virtud, de la buena crianza y de las buenas y cristianas costumbres, para
que cuando grandes sean báculo de la vejez de sus padres y gloria de su
posteridad; y en lo de forzarles que estudien esta o aquella ciencia no lo
tengo por acertado, aunque el persuadirles no será dañoso; y cuando no se
ha de estudiar para pane lucrando, siendo tan venturoso el estudiante que
le dio el cielo padres que se lo dejen, sería yo de parecer que le dejen
seguir aquella ciencia a que más le vieren inclinado; y, aunque la de la
poesía es menos útil que deleitable, no es de aquellas que suelen deshonrar
a quien las posee. La poesía, señor hidalgo, a mi parecer, es como una
doncella tierna y de poca edad, y en todo estremo hermosa, a quien tienen
cuidado de enriquecer, pulir y adornar otras muchas doncellas, que son
todas las otras ciencias, y ella se ha de servir de todas, y todas se han
de autorizar con ella; pero esta tal doncella no quiere ser manoseada, ni
traída por las calles, ni publicada por las esquinas de las plazas ni por
los rincones de los palacios. Ella es hecha de una alquimia de tal virtud,
que quien la sabe tratar la volverá en oro purísimo de inestimable precio;
hala de tener, el que la tuviere, a raya, no dejándola correr en torpes
sátiras ni en desalmados sonetos; no ha de ser vendible en ninguna manera,
si ya no fuere en poemas heroicos, en lamentables tragedias, o en comedias
alegres y artificiosas; no se ha de dejar tratar de los truhanes, ni del
ignorante vulgo, incapaz de conocer ni estimar los tesoros que en ella se
encierran. Y no penséis, señor, que yo llamo aquí vulgo solamente a la
gente plebeya y humilde; que todo aquel que no sabe, aunque sea señor y
príncipe, puede y debe entrar en número de vulgo. Y así, el que con los
requisitos que he dicho tratare y tuviere a la poesía, será famoso y
estimado su nombre en todas las naciones políticas del mundo. Y a lo que
decís, señor, que vuestro hijo no estima mucho la poesía de romance, doyme
a entender que no anda muy acertado en ello, y la razón es ésta: el grande
Homero no escribió en latín, porque era griego, ni Virgilio no escribió en
griego, porque era latino. En resolución, todos los poetas antiguos
escribieron en la lengua que mamaron en la leche, y no fueron a buscar las
estranjeras para declarar la alteza de sus conceptos. Y, siendo esto así,
razón sería se estendiese esta costumbre por todas las naciones, y que no
se desestimase el poeta alemán porque escribe en su lengua, ni el
castellano, ni aun el vizcaíno, que escribe en la suya. Pero vuestro hijo,
a lo que yo, señor, imagino, no debe de estar mal con la poesía de romance,
sino con los poetas que son meros romancistas, sin saber otras lenguas ni
otras ciencias que adornen y despierten y ayuden a su natural impulso; y
aun en esto puede haber yerro; porque, según es opinión verdadera, el poeta
nace: quieren decir que del vientre de su madre el poeta natural sale
poeta; y, con aquella inclinación que le dio el cielo, sin más estudio ni
artificio, compone cosas, que hace verdadero al que dijo: est Deus in
nobis..., etcétera. También digo que el natural poeta que se ayudare del
arte será mucho mejor y se aventajará al poeta que sólo por saber el arte
quisiere serlo; la razón es porque el arte no se aventaja a la naturaleza,
sino perficiónala; así que, mezcladas la naturaleza y el arte, y el arte
con la naturaleza, sacarán un perfetísimo poeta. Sea, pues, la conclusión
de mi plática, señor hidalgo, que vuesa merced deje caminar a su hijo por
donde su estrella le llama; que, siendo él tan buen estudiante como debe de
ser, y habiendo ya subido felicemente el primer escalón de las esencias,
que es el de las lenguas, con ellas por sí mesmo subirá a la cumbre de las
letras humanas, las cuales tan bien parecen en un caballero de capa y
espada, y así le adornan, honran y engrandecen, como las mitras a los
obispos, o como las garnachas a los peritos jurisconsultos. Riña vuesa
merced a su hijo si hiciere sátiras que perjudiquen las honras ajenas, y
castíguele, y rómpaselas, pero si hiciere sermones al modo de Horacio,
donde reprehenda los vicios en general, como tan elegantemente él lo hizo,
alábele: porque lícito es al poeta escribir contra la invidia, y decir en
sus versos mal de los invidiosos, y así de los otros vicios, con que no
señale persona alguna; pero hay poetas que, a trueco de decir una malicia,
se pondrán a peligro que los destierren a las islas de Ponto. Si el poeta
fuere casto en sus costumbres, lo será también en sus versos; la pluma es
lengua del alma: cuales fueren los conceptos que en ella se engendraren,
tales serán sus escritos; y cuando los reyes y príncipes veen la milagrosa
ciencia de la poesía en sujetos prudentes, virtuosos y graves, los honran,
los estiman y los enriquecen, y aun los coronan con las hojas del árbol a
quien no ofende el rayo, como en señal que no han de ser ofendidos de nadie
los que con tales coronas veen honrados y adornadas sus sienes.

Admirado quedó el del Verde Gabán del razonamiento de don Quijote, y tanto,
que fue perdiendo de la opinión que con él tenía, de ser mentecato. Pero, a
la mitad desta plática, Sancho, por no ser muy de su gusto, se había
desviado del camino a pedir un poco de leche a unos pastores que allí junto
estaban ordeñando unas ovejas; y, en esto, ya volvía a renovar la plática
el hidalgo, satisfecho en estremo de la discreción y buen discurso de don
Quijote, cuando, alzando don Quijote la cabeza, vio que por el camino por
donde ellos iban venía un carro lleno de banderas reales; y, creyendo que
debía de ser alguna nueva aventura, a grandes voces llamó a Sancho que
viniese a darle la celada. El cual Sancho, oyéndose llamar, dejó a los
pastores, y a toda priesa picó al rucio, y llegó donde su amo estaba, a
quien sucedió una espantosa y desatinada aventura.





Capítulo XVII. De donde se declaró el último punto y estremo adonde llegó y
pudo llegar el inaudito ánimo de don Quijote, con la felicemente acabada
aventura de los leones


Cuenta la historia que cuando don Quijote daba voces a Sancho que le
trujese el yelmo, estaba él comprando unos requesones que los pastores le
vendían; y, acosado de la mucha priesa de su amo, no supo qué hacer dellos,
ni en qué traerlos, y, por no perderlos, que ya los tenía pagados, acordó
de echarlos en la celada de su señor, y con este buen recado volvió a ver
lo que le quería; el cual, en llegando, le dijo:

-Dame, amigo, esa celada; que yo sé poco de aventuras, o lo que allí
descubro es alguna que me ha de necesitar, y me necesita, a tomar mis
armas.

El del Verde Gabán, que esto oyó, tendió la vista por todas partes, y no
descubrió otra cosa que un carro que hacia ellos venía, con dos o tres
banderas pequeñas, que le dieron a entender que el tal carro debía de traer
moneda de Su Majestad, y así se lo dijo a don Quijote; pero él no le dio
crédito, siempre creyendo y pensando que todo lo que le sucediese habían de
ser aventuras y más aventuras, y así, respondió al hidalgo:

-Hombre apercebido, medio combatido: no se pierde nada en que yo me
aperciba, que sé por experiencia que tengo enemigos visibles e invisibles,
y no sé cuándo, ni adónde, ni en qué tiempo, ni en qué figuras me han de
acometer.

Y, volviéndose a Sancho, le pidió la celada; el cual, como no tuvo lugar de
sacar los requesones, le fue forzoso dársela como estaba. Tomóla don
Quijote, y, sin que echase de ver lo que dentro venía, con toda priesa se
la encajó en la cabeza; y, como los requesones se apretaron y exprimieron,
comenzó a correr el suero por todo el rostro y barbas de don Quijote, de lo
que recibió tal susto, que dijo a Sancho:

-¿Qué será esto, Sancho, que parece que se me ablandan los cascos, o se me
derriten los sesos, o que sudo de los pies a la cabeza? Y si es que sudo,
en verdad que no es de miedo; sin duda creo que es terrible la aventura que
agora quiere sucederme. Dame, si tienes, con que me limpie, que el copioso
sudor me ciega los ojos.

Calló Sancho y diole un paño, y dio con él gracias a Dios de que su señor
no hubiese caído en el caso. Limpióse don Quijote y quitóse la celada por
ver qué cosa era la que, a su parecer, le enfriaba la cabeza, y, viendo
aquellas gachas blancas dentro de la celada, las llegó a las narices, y en
oliéndolas dijo:

-Por vida de mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso, que son requesones los que aquí
me has puesto, traidor, bergante y mal mirado escudero.

A lo que, con gran flema y disimulación, respondió Sancho:

-Si son requesones, démelos vuesa merced, que yo me los comeré... Pero
cómalos el diablo, que debió de ser el que ahí los puso. ¿Yo había de tener
atrevimiento de ensuciar el yelmo de vuesa merced? ¡Hallado le habéis el
atrevido! A la fe, señor, a lo que Dios me da a entender, también debo yo
de tener encantadores que me persiguen como a hechura y miembro de vuesa
merced, y habrán puesto ahí esa inmundicia para mover a cólera su paciencia
y hacer que me muela, como suele, las costillas. Pues en verdad que esta
vez han dado salto en vago, que yo confío en el buen discurso de mi señor,
que habrá considerado que ni yo tengo requesones, ni leche, ni otra cosa
que lo valga, y que si la tuviera, antes la pusiera en mi estómago que en
la celada.

-Todo puede ser -dijo don Quijote.

Y todo lo miraba el hidalgo, y de todo se admiraba, especialmente cuando,
después de haberse limpiado don Quijote cabeza, rostro y barbas y celada,
se la encajó; y, afirmándose bien en los estribos, requiriendo la espada y
asiendo la lanza, dijo:

-Ahora, venga lo que veniere, que aquí estoy con ánimo de tomarme con el
mesmo Satanás en persona.

Llegó en esto el carro de las banderas, en el cual no venía otra gente que
el carretero, en las mulas, y un hombre sentado en la delantera. Púsose don
Quijote delante y dijo:

-¿Adónde vais, hermanos? ¿Qué carro es éste, qué lleváis en él y qué
banderas son aquéstas?

A lo que respondió el carretero:

-El carro es mío; lo que va en él son dos bravos leones enjaulados, que el
general de Orán envía a la corte, presentados a Su Majestad; las banderas
son del rey nuestro señor, en señal que aquí va cosa suya.

-Y ¿son grandes los leones? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Tan grandes -respondió el hombre que iba a la puerta del carro-, que no
han pasado mayores, ni tan grandes, de Africa a España jamás; y yo soy el
leonero, y he pasado otros, pero como éstos, ninguno. Son hembra y macho;
el macho va en esta jaula primera, y la hembra en la de atrás; y ahora van
hambrientos porque no han comido hoy; y así, vuesa merced se desvíe, que es
menester llegar presto donde les demos de comer.

A lo que dijo don Quijote, sonriéndose un poco:

-¿Leoncitos a mí? ¿A mí leoncitos, y a tales horas? Pues, ¡por Dios que han
de ver esos señores que acá los envían si soy yo hombre que se espanta de
leones! Apeaos, buen hombre, y, pues sois el leonero, abrid esas jaulas y
echadme esas bestias fuera, que en mitad desta campaña les daré a conocer
quién es don Quijote de la Mancha, a despecho y pesar de los encantadores
que a mí los envían.

-¡Ta, ta! -dijo a esta sazón entre sí el hidalgo-, dado ha señal de quién
es nuestro buen caballero: los requesones, sin duda, le han ablandado los
cascos y madurado los sesos.

Llegóse en esto a él Sancho y díjole:

-Señor, por quien Dios es, que vuesa merced haga de manera que mi señor don
Quijote no se tome con estos leones, que si se toma, aquí nos han de hacer
pedazos a todos.

-Pues, ¿tan loco es vuestro amo -respondió el hidalgo-, que teméis, y
creéis que se ha de tomar con tan fieros animales?

-No es loco -respondió Sancho-, sino atrevido.

-Yo haré que no lo sea -replicó el hidalgo.

Y, llegándose a don Quijote, que estaba dando priesa al leonero que abriese
las jaulas, le dijo:

-Señor caballero, los caballeros andantes han de acometer las aventuras que
prometen esperanza de salir bien dellas, y no aquellas que de en todo la
quitan; porque la valentía que se entra en la juridición de la temeridad,
más tiene de locura que de fortaleza. Cuanto más, que estos leones no
vienen contra vuesa merced, ni lo sueñan: van presentados a Su Majestad, y
no será bien detenerlos ni impedirles su viaje.

-Váyase vuesa merced, señor hidalgo -respondió don Quijote-, a entender con
su perdigón manso y con su hurón atrevido, y deje a cada uno hacer su
oficio. Éste es el mío, y yo sé si vienen a mí, o no, estos señores leones.

Y, volviéndose al leonero, le dijo:

-¡Voto a tal, don bellaco, que si no abrís luego luego las jaulas, que con
esta lanza os he de coser con el carro!

El carretero, que vio la determinación de aquella armada fantasía, le dijo:

-Señor mío, vuestra merced sea servido, por caridad, dejarme desuncir las
mulas y ponerme en salvo con ellas antes que se desenvainen los leones,
porque si me las matan, quedaré rematado para toda mi vida; que no tengo
otra hacienda sino este carro y estas mulas.

-¡Oh hombre de poca fe! -respondió don Quijote-, apéate y desunce, y haz lo
que quisieres, que presto verás que trabajaste en vano y que pudieras
ahorrar desta diligencia.

Apeóse el carretero y desunció a gran priesa, y el leonero dijo a grandes
voces:

-Séanme testigos cuantos aquí están cómo contra mi voluntad y forzado abro
las jaulas y suelto los leones, y de que protesto a este señor que todo el
mal y daño que estas bestias hicieren corra y vaya por su cuenta, con más
mis salarios y derechos. Vuestras mercedes, señores, se pongan en cobro
antes que abra, que yo seguro estoy que no me han de hacer daño.

Otra vez le persuadió el hidalgo que no hiciese locura semejante, que era
tentar a Dios acometer tal disparate. A lo que respondió don Quijote que él
sabía lo que hacía. Respondióle el hidalgo que lo mirase bien, que él
entendía que se engañaba.

-Ahora, señor -replicó don Quijote-, si vuesa merced no quiere ser oyente
desta que a su parecer ha de ser tragedia, pique la tordilla y póngase en
salvo.

Oído lo cual por Sancho, con lágrimas en los ojos le suplicó desistiese de
tal empresa, en cuya comparación habían sido tortas y pan pintado la de los
molinos de viento y la temerosa de los batanes, y, finalmente, todas las
hazañas que había acometido en todo el discurso de su vida.

-Mire, señor -decía Sancho-, que aquí no hay encanto ni cosa que lo valga;
que yo he visto por entre las verjas y resquicios de la jaula una uña de
león verdadero, y saco por ella que el tal león, cuya debe de ser la tal
uña, es mayor que una montaña.

-El miedo, a lo menos -respondió don Quijote-, te le hará parecer mayor
que la mitad del mundo. Retírate, Sancho, y déjame; y si aquí muriere, ya
sabes nuestro antiguo concierto: acudirás a Dulcinea, y no te digo más.

A éstas añadió otras razones, con que quitó las esperanzas de que no había
de dejar de proseguir su desvariado intento. Quisiera el del Verde Gabán
oponérsele, pero viose desigual en las armas, y no le pareció cordura
tomarse con un loco, que ya se lo había parecido de todo punto don Quijote;
el cual, volviendo a dar priesa al leonero y a reiterar las amenazas, dio
ocasión al hidalgo a que picase la yegua, y Sancho al rucio, y el carretero
a sus mulas, procurando todos apartarse del carro lo más que pudiesen,
antes que los leones se desembanastasen.

Lloraba Sancho la muerte de su señor, que aquella vez sin duda creía que
llegaba en las garras de los leones; maldecía su ventura, y llamaba
menguada la hora en que le vino al pensamiento volver a servirle; pero no
por llorar y lamentarse dejaba de aporrear al rucio para que se alejase del
carro. Viendo, pues, el leonero que ya los que iban huyendo estaban bien
desviados, tornó a requerir y a intimar a don Quijote lo que ya le había
requerido e intimado, el cual respondió que lo oía, y que no se curase de
más intimaciones y requirimientos, que todo sería de poco fruto, y que se
diese priesa.

En el espacio que tardó el leonero en abrir la jaula primera, estuvo
considerando don Quijote si sería bien hacer la batalla antes a pie que a
caballo; y, en fin, se determinó de hacerla a pie, temiendo que Rocinante
se espantaría con la vista de los leones. Por esto saltó del caballo,
arrojó la lanza y embrazó el escudo, y, desenvainando la espada, paso ante
paso, con maravilloso denuedo y corazón valiente, se fue a poner delante
del carro, encomendándose a Dios de todo corazón, y luego a su señora
Dulcinea.

Y es de saber que, llegando a este paso, el autor de esta verdadera
historia exclama y dice: ''¡Oh fuerte y, sobre todo encarecimiento, animoso
don Quijote de la Mancha, espejo donde se pueden mirar todos los valientes
del mundo, segundo y nuevo don Manuel de León, que fue gloria y honra de
los españoles caballeros! ¿Con qué palabras contaré esta tan espantosa
hazaña, o con qué razones la haré creíble a los siglos venideros, o qué
alabanzas habrá que no te convengan y cuadren, aunque sean hipérboles sobre
todos los hipérboles? Tú a pie, tú solo, tú intrépido, tú magnánimo, con
sola una espada, y no de las del perrillo cortadoras, con un escudo no de
muy luciente y limpio acero, estás aguardando y atendiendo los dos más
fieros leones que jamás criaron las africanas selvas. Tus mismos hechos
sean los que te alaben, valeroso manchego, que yo los dejo aquí en su punto
por faltarme palabras con que encarecerlos''.

Aquí cesó la referida exclamación del autor, y pasó adelante, anudando el
hilo de la historia, diciendo que, visto el leonero ya puesto en postura a
don Quijote, y que no podía dejar de soltar al león macho, so pena de caer
en la desgracia del indignado y atrevido caballero, abrió de par en par la
primera jaula, donde estaba, como se ha dicho, el león, el cual pareció de
grandeza extraordinaria y de espantable y fea catadura. Lo primero que hizo
fue revolverse en la jaula, donde venía echado, y tender la garra, y
desperezarse todo; abrió luego la boca y bostezó muy despacio, y, con casi
dos palmos de lengua que sacó fuera, se despolvoreó los ojos y se lavó el
rostro; hecho esto, sacó la cabeza fuera de la jaula y miró a todas partes
con los ojos hechos brasas, vista y ademán para poner espanto a la misma
temeridad. Sólo don Quijote lo miraba atentamente, deseando que saltase ya
del carro y viniese con él a las manos, entre las cuales pensaba hacerle
pedazos.

Hasta aquí llegó el estremo de su jamás vista locura. Pero el generoso
león, más comedido que arrogante, no haciendo caso de niñerías, ni de
bravatas, después de haber mirado a una y otra parte, como se ha dicho,
volvió las espaldas y enseñó sus traseras partes a don Quijote, y con gran
flema y remanso se volvió a echar en la jaula. Viendo lo cual don Quijote,
mandó al leonero que le diese de palos y le irritase para echarle fuera.

-Eso no haré yo -respondió el leonero-, porque si yo le instigo, el primero
a quien hará pedazos será a mí mismo. Vuesa merced, señor caballero, se
contente con lo hecho, que es todo lo que puede decirse en género de
valentía, y no quiera tentar segunda fortuna. El león tiene abierta la
puerta: en su mano está salir, o no salir; pero, pues no ha salido hasta
ahora, no saldrá en todo el día. La grandeza del corazón de vuesa merced ya
está bien declarada: ningún bravo peleante, según a mí se me alcanza, está
obligado a más que a desafiar a su enemigo y esperarle en campaña; y si el
contrario no acude, en él se queda la infamia, y el esperante gana la
corona del vencimiento.

-Así es verdad -respondió don Quijote-: cierra, amigo, la puerta, y dame
por testimonio, en la mejor forma que pudieres, lo que aquí me has visto
hacer; conviene a saber: cómo tú abriste al león, yo le esperé, él no
salió; volvíle a esperar, volvió a no salir y volvióse acostar. No debo
más, y encantos afuera, y Dios ayude a la razón y a la verdad, y a la
verdadera caballería; y cierra, como he dicho, en tanto que hago señas a
los huidos y ausentes, para que sepan de tu boca esta hazaña.

Hízolo así el leonero, y don Quijote, poniendo en la punta de la lanza el
lienzo con que se había limpiado el rostro de la lluvia de los requesones,
comenzó a llamar a los que no dejaban de huir ni de volver la cabeza a cada
paso, todos en tropa y antecogidos del hidalgo; pero, alcanzando Sancho a
ver la señal del blanco paño, dijo:

-Que me maten si mi señor no ha vencido a las fieras bestias, pues nos
llama.

Detuviéronse todos, y conocieron que el que hacía las señas era don
Quijote; y, perdiendo alguna parte del miedo, poco a poco se vinieron
acercando hasta donde claramente oyeron las voces de don Quijote, que los
llamaba. Finalmente, volvieron al carro, y, en llegando, dijo don Quijote
al carretero:

-Volved, hermano, a uncir vuestras mulas y a proseguir vuestro viaje; y tú,
Sancho, dale dos escudos de oro, para él y para el leonero, en recompensa
de lo que por mí se han detenido.

-Ésos daré yo de muy buena gana -respondió Sancho-; pero, ¿qué se han hecho
los leones? ¿Son muertos, o vivos?

Entonces el leonero, menudamente y por sus pausas, contó el fin de la
contienda, exagerando, como él mejor pudo y supo, el valor de don Quijote,
de cuya vista el león, acobardado, no quiso ni osó salir de la jaula,
puesto que había tenido un buen espacio abierta la puerta de la jaula; y
que, por haber él dicho a aquel caballero que era tentar a Dios irritar al
león para que por fuerza saliese, como él quería que se irritase, mal de su
grado y contra toda su voluntad, había permitido que la puerta se cerrase.

-¿Qué te parece desto, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Hay encantos que valgan
contra la verdadera valentía? Bien podrán los encantadores quitarme la
ventura, pero el esfuerzo y el ánimo, será imposible.

Dio los escudos Sancho, unció el carretero, besó las manos el leonero a don
Quijote por la merced recebida, y prometióle de contar aquella valerosa
hazaña al mismo rey, cuando en la corte se viese.

-Pues, si acaso Su Majestad preguntare quién la hizo, diréisle que el
Caballero de los Leones, que de aquí adelante quiero que en éste se
trueque, cambie, vuelva y mude el que hasta aquí he tenido del Caballero de
la Triste Figura; y en esto sigo la antigua usanza de los andantes
caballeros, que se mudaban los nombres cuando querían, o cuando les venía a
cuento.

Siguió su camino el carro, y don Quijote, Sancho y el del Verde Gabán
prosiguieron el suyo.

En todo este tiempo no había hablado palabra don Diego de Miranda, todo
atento a mirar y a notar los hechos y palabras de don Quijote, pareciéndole
que era un cuerdo loco y un loco que tiraba a cuerdo. No había aún llegado
a su noticia la primera parte de su historia; que si la hubiera leído,
cesara la admiración en que lo ponían sus hechos y sus palabras, pues ya
supiera el género de su locura; pero, como no la sabía, ya le tenía por
cuerdo y ya por loco, porque lo que hablaba era concertado, elegante y bien
dicho, y lo que hacía, disparatado, temerario y tonto. Y decía entre sí:

-¿Qué más locura puede ser que ponerse la celada llena de requesones y
darse a entender que le ablandaban los cascos los encantadores? Y ¿qué
mayor temeridad y disparate que querer pelear por fuerza con leones?

Destas imaginaciones y deste soliloquio le sacó don Quijote, diciéndole:

-¿Quién duda, señor don Diego de Miranda, que vuestra merced no me tenga en
su opinión por un hombre disparatado y loco? Y no sería mucho que así
fuese, porque mis obras no pueden dar testimonio de otra cosa. Pues, con
todo esto, quiero que vuestra merced advierta que no soy tan loco ni tan
menguado como debo de haberle parecido. Bien parece un gallardo caballero,
a los ojos de su rey, en la mitad de una gran plaza, dar una lanzada con
felice suceso a un bravo toro; bien parece un caballero, armado de
resplandecientes armas, pasar la tela en alegres justas delante de las
damas, y bien parecen todos aquellos caballeros que en ejercicios
militares, o que lo parezcan, entretienen y alegran, y, si se puede decir,
honran las cortes de sus príncipes; pero sobre todos éstos parece mejor un
caballero andante, que por los desiertos, por las soledades, por las
encrucijadas, por las selvas y por los montes anda buscando peligrosas
aventuras, con intención de darles dichosa y bien afortunada cima, sólo por
alcanzar gloriosa fama y duradera. Mejor parece, digo, un caballero
andante, socorriendo a una viuda en algún despoblado, que un cortesano
caballero, requebrando a una doncella en las ciudades. Todos los caballeros
tienen sus particulares ejercicios: sirva a las damas el cortesano;
autorice la corte de su rey con libreas; sustente los caballeros pobres con
el espléndido plato de su mesa; concierte justas, mantenga torneos y
muéstrese grande, liberal y magnífico, y buen cristiano, sobre todo, y
desta manera cumplirá con sus precisas obligaciones. Pero el andante
caballero busque los rincones del mundo; éntrese en los más intricados
laberintos; acometa a cada paso lo imposible; resista en los páramos
despoblados los ardientes rayos del sol en la mitad del verano, y en el
invierno la dura inclemencia de los vientos y de los yelos; no le asombren
leones, ni le espanten vestiglos, ni atemoricen endriagos; que buscar
éstos, acometer aquéllos y vencerlos a todos son sus principales y
verdaderos ejercicios. Yo, pues, como me cupo en suerte ser uno del número
de la andante caballería, no puedo dejar de acometer todo aquello que a mí
me pareciere que cae debajo de la juridición de mis ejercicios; y así, el
acometer los leones que ahora acometí derechamente me tocaba, puesto que
conocí ser temeridad esorbitante, porque bien sé lo que es valentía, que es
una virtud que está puesta entre dos estremos viciosos, como son la
cobardía y la temeridad; pero menos mal será que el que es valiente toque y
suba al punto de temerario, que no que baje y toque en el punto de cobarde;
que así como es más fácil venir el pródigo a ser liberal que al avaro, así
es más fácil dar el temerario en verdadero valiente que no el cobarde subir
a la verdadera valentía; y, en esto de acometer aventuras, créame vuesa
merced, señor don Diego, que antes se ha de perder por carta de más que de
menos, porque mejor suena en las orejas de los que lo oyen "el tal
caballero es temerario y atrevido" que no "el tal caballero es tímido y
cobarde".

-Digo, señor don Quijote -respondió don Diego-, que todo lo que vuesa
merced ha dicho y hecho va nivelado con el fiel de la misma razón, y que
entiendo que si las ordenanzas y leyes de la caballería andante se
perdiesen, se hallarían en el pecho de vuesa merced como en su mismo
depósito y archivo. Y démonos priesa, que se hace tarde, y lleguemos a mi
aldea y casa, donde descansará vuestra merced del pasado trabajo, que si no
ha sido del cuerpo, ha sido del espíritu, que suele tal vez redundar en
cansancio del cuerpo.

-Tengo el ofrecimiento a gran favor y merced, señor don Diego- respondió
don Quijote.

Y, picando más de lo que hasta entonces, serían como las dos de la tarde
cuando llegaron a la aldea y a la casa de don Diego, a quien don Quijote
llamaba el Caballero del Verde Gabán.





Capítulo XVIII. De lo que sucedió a don Quijote en el castillo o casa del
Caballero del Verde Gabán, con otras cosas extravagantes


Halló don Quijote ser la casa de don Diego de Miranda ancha como de aldea;
las armas, empero, aunque de piedra tosca, encima de la puerta de la calle;
la bodega, en el patio; la cueva, en el portal, y muchas tinajas a la
redonda, que, por ser del Toboso, le renovaron las memorias de su encantada
y transformada Dulcinea; y sospirando, y sin mirar lo que decía, ni delante
de quién estaba, dijo:

-¡Oh dulces prendas, por mi mal halladas,

dulces y alegres cuando Dios quería!

¡Oh tobosescas tinajas, que me habéis traído a la memoria la dulce prenda
de mi mayor amargura!

Oyóle decir esto el estudiante poeta, hijo de don Diego, que con su madre
había salido a recebirle, y madre y hijo quedaron suspensos de ver la
estraña figura de don Quijote; el cual, apeándose de Rocinante, fue con
mucha cortesía a pedirle las manos para besárselas, y don Diego dijo:

-Recebid, señora, con vuestro sólito agrado al señor don Quijote de la
Mancha, que es el que tenéis delante, andante caballero y el más valiente y
el más discreto que tiene el mundo.

La señora, que doña Cristina se llamaba, le recibió con muestras de mucho
amor y de mucha cortesía, y don Quijote se le ofreció con asaz de discretas
y comedidas razones. Casi los mismos comedimientos pasó con el estudiante,
que, en oyéndole hablar don Quijote, le tuvo por discreto y agudo.

Aquí pinta el autor todas las circunstancias de la casa de don Diego,
pintándonos en ellas lo que contiene una casa de un caballero labrador y
rico; pero al traductor desta historia le pareció pasar estas y otras
semejantes menudencias en silencio, porque no venían bien con el propósito
principal de la historia, la cual más tiene su fuerza en la verdad que en
las frías digresiones.

Entraron a don Quijote en una sala, desarmóle Sancho, quedó en valones y en
jubón de camuza, todo bisunto con la mugre de las armas: el cuello era
valona a lo estudiantil, sin almidón y sin randas; los borceguíes eran
datilados, y encerados los zapatos. Ciñóse su buena espada, que pendía de
un tahalí de lobos marinos; que es opinión que muchos años fue enfermo de
los riñones; cubrióse un herreruelo de buen paño pardo; pero antes de todo,
con cinco calderos, o seis, de agua, que en la cantidad de los calderos hay
alguna diferencia, se lavó la cabeza y rostro, y todavía se quedó el agua
de color de suero, merced a la golosina de Sancho y a la compra de sus
negros requesones, que tan blanco pusieron a su amo. Con los referidos
atavíos, y con gentil donaire y gallardía, salió don Quijote a otra sala,
donde el estudiante le estaba esperando para entretenerle en tanto que las
mesas se ponían; que, por la venida de tan noble huésped, quería la señora
doña Cristina mostrar que sabía y podía regalar a los que a su casa
llegasen.

En tanto que don Quijote se estuvo desarmando, tuvo lugar don Lorenzo, que
así se llamaba el hijo de don Diego, de decir a su padre:

-¿Quién diremos, señor, que es este caballero que vuesa merced nos ha
traído a casa? Que el nombre, la figura, y el decir que es caballero
andante, a mí y a mi madre nos tiene suspensos.

-No sé lo que te diga, hijo -respondió don Diego-; sólo te sabré decir que
le he visto hacer cosas del mayor loco del mundo, y decir razones tan
discretas que borran y deshacen sus hechos: háblale tú, y toma el pulso a
lo que sabe, y, pues eres discreto, juzga de su discreción o tontería lo
que más puesto en razón estuviere; aunque, para decir verdad, antes le
tengo por loco que por cuerdo.

Con esto, se fue don Lorenzo a entretener a don Quijote, como queda dicho,
y, entre otras pláticas que los dos pasaron, dijo don Quijote a don
Lorenzo:

-El señor don Diego de Miranda, padre de vuesa merced, me ha dado noticia
de la rara habilidad y sutil ingenio que vuestra merced tiene, y, sobre
todo, que es vuesa merced un gran poeta.

-Poeta, bien podrá ser -respondió don Lorenzo-, pero grande, ni por
pensamiento. Verdad es que yo soy algún tanto aficionado a la poesía y a
leer los buenos poetas, pero no de manera que se me pueda dar el nombre de
grande que mi padre dice.

-No me parece mal esa humildad -respondió don Quijote-, porque no hay poeta
que no sea arrogante y piense de sí que es el mayor poeta del mundo.

-No hay regla sin excepción -respondió don Lorenzo-, y alguno habrá que lo
sea y no lo piense.

-Pocos -respondió don Quijote-; pero dígame vuesa merced: ¿qué versos son
los que agora trae entre manos, que me ha dicho el señor su padre que le
traen algo inquieto y pensativo? Y si es alguna glosa, a mí se me entiende
algo de achaque de glosas, y holgaría saberlos; y si es que son de justa
literaria, procure vuestra merced llevar el segundo premio, que el primero
siempre se lleva el favor o la gran calidad de la persona, el segundo se le
lleva la mera justicia, y el tercero viene a ser segundo, y el primero, a
esta cuenta, será el tercero, al modo de las licencias que se dan en las
universidades; pero, con todo esto, gran personaje es el nombre de primero.

-Hasta ahora -dijo entre sí don Lorenzo-, no os podré yo juzgar por loco;
vamos adelante.

Y díjole:

-Paréceme que vuesa merced ha cursado las escuelas: ¿qué ciencias ha oído?

-La de la caballería andante -respondió don Quijote-, que es tan buena como
la de la poesía, y aun dos deditos más.

-No sé qué ciencia sea ésa -replicó don Lorenzo-, y hasta ahora no ha
llegado a mi noticia.

-Es una ciencia -replicó don Quijote- que encierra en sí todas o las más
ciencias del mundo, a causa que el que la profesa ha de ser jurisperito, y
saber las leyes de la justicia distributiva y comutativa, para dar a cada
uno lo que es suyo y lo que le conviene; ha de ser teólogo, para saber dar
razón de la cristiana ley que profesa, clara y distintamente, adondequiera
que le fuere pedido; ha de ser médico y principalmente herbolario, para
conocer en mitad de los despoblados y desiertos las yerbas que tienen
virtud de sanar las heridas, que no ha de andar el caballero andante a cada
triquete buscando quien se las cure; ha de ser astrólogo, para conocer por
las estrellas cuántas horas son pasadas de la noche, y en qué parte y en
qué clima del mundo se halla; ha de saber las matemáticas, porque a cada
paso se le ofrecerá tener necesidad dellas; y, dejando aparte que ha de
estar adornado de todas las virtudes teologales y cardinales, decendiendo a
otras menudencias, digo que ha de saber nadar como dicen que nadaba el peje
Nicolás o Nicolao; ha de saber herrar un caballo y aderezar la silla y el
freno; y, volviendo a lo de arriba, ha de guardar la fe a Dios y a su dama;
ha de ser casto en los pensamientos, honesto en las palabras, liberal en
las obras, valiente en los hechos, sufrido en los trabajos, caritativo con
los menesterosos, y, finalmente, mantenedor de la verdad, aunque le cueste
la vida el defenderla. De todas estas grandes y mínimas partes se compone
un buen caballero andante; porque vea vuesa merced, señor don Lorenzo, si
es ciencia mocosa lo que aprende el caballero que la estudia y la profesa,
y si se puede igualar a las más estiradas que en los ginasios y escuelas se
enseñan.

-Si eso es así -replicó don Lorenzo-, yo digo que se aventaja esa ciencia a
todas.

-¿Cómo si es así? -respondió don Quijote.

Lo que yo quiero decir -dijo don Lorenzo- es que dudo que haya habido, ni
que los hay ahora, caballeros andantes y adornados de virtudes tantas.

-Muchas veces he dicho lo que vuelvo a decir ahora -respondió don Quijote-:
que la mayor parte de la gente del mundo está de parecer de que no ha
habido en él caballeros andantes; y, por parecerme a mí que si el cielo
milagrosamente no les da a entender la verdad de que los hubo y de que los
hay, cualquier trabajo que se tome ha de ser en vano, como muchas veces me
lo ha mostrado la experiencia, no quiero detenerme agora en sacar a vuesa
merced del error que con los muchos tiene; lo que pienso hacer es el rogar
al cielo le saque dél, y le dé a entender cuán provechosos y cuán
necesarios fueron al mundo los caballeros andantes en los pasados siglos, y
cuán útiles fueran en el presente si se usaran; pero triunfan ahora, por
pecados de las gentes, la pereza, la ociosidad, la gula y el regalo.

-Escapado se nos ha nuestro huésped -dijo a esta sazón entre sí don
Lorenzo-, pero, con todo eso, él es loco bizarro, y yo sería mentecato
flojo si así no lo creyese.

Aquí dieron fin a su plática, porque los llamaron a comer. Preguntó don
Diego a su hijo qué había sacado en limpio del ingenio del huésped. A lo
que él respondió:

-No le sacarán del borrador de su locura cuantos médicos y buenos
escribanos tiene el mundo: él es un entreverado loco, lleno de lúcidos
intervalos.

Fuéronse a comer, y la comida fue tal como don Diego había dicho en el
camino que la solía dar a sus convidados: limpia, abundante y sabrosa; pero
de lo que más se contentó don Quijote fue del maravilloso silencio que en
toda la casa había, que semejaba un monasterio de cartujos. Levantados,
pues, los manteles, y dadas gracias a Dios y agua a las manos, don
Quijote pidió ahincadamente a don Lorenzo dijese los versos de la justa
literaria; a lo que él respondió que, por no parecer de aquellos poetas que
cuando les ruegan digan sus versos los niegan y cuando no se los piden los
vomitan,...

-...yo diré mi glosa, de la cual no espero premio alguno, que sólo por
ejercitar el ingenio la he hecho.

-Un amigo y discreto -respondió don Quijote- era de parecer que no se había
de cansar nadie en glosar versos; y la razón, decía él, era que jamás la
glosa podía llegar al texto, y que muchas o las más veces iba la glosa
fuera de la intención y propósito de lo que pedía lo que se glosaba; y más,
que las leyes de la glosa eran demasiadamente estrechas: que no sufrían
interrogantes, ni dijo, ni diré, ni hacer nombres de verbos, ni mudar el
sentido, con otras ataduras y estrechezas con que van atados los que
glosan, como vuestra merced debe de saber.

-Verdaderamente, señor don Quijote -dijo don Lorenzo-, que deseo coger a
vuestra merced en un mal latín continuado, y no puedo, porque se me desliza
de entre las manos como anguila.

-No entiendo -respondió don Quijote- lo que vuestra merced dice ni quiere
decir en eso del deslizarme.

-Yo me daré a entender -respondió don Lorenzo-; y por ahora esté vuesa
merced atento a los versos glosados y a la glosa, que dicen desta manera:

   ¡Si mi fue tornase a es,
   sin esperar más será,
   o viniese el tiempo ya
   de lo que será después...!

Glosa

   Al fin, como todo pasa,
   se pasó el bien que me dio
   Fortuna, un tiempo no escasa,
   y nunca me le volvió,
   ni abundante, ni por tasa.
   Siglos ha ya que me vees,
   Fortuna, puesto a tus pies;
   vuélveme a ser venturoso,
   que será mi ser dichoso
   si mi fue tornase a es.
   No quiero otro gusto o gloria,
   otra palma o vencimiento,
   otro triunfo, otra vitoria,
   sino volver al contento
   que es pesar en mi memoria.
   Si tú me vuelves allá,
   Fortuna, templado está
   todo el rigor de mi fuego,
   y más si este bien es luego,
   sin esperar más será.
   Cosas imposibles pido,
   pues volver el tiempo a ser
   después que una vez ha sido,
   no hay en la tierra poder
   que a tanto se haya estendido.
   Corre el tiempo, vuela y va
   ligero, y no volverá,
   y erraría el que pidiese,
   o que el tiempo ya se fuese,
   o volviese el tiempo ya.
   Vivo en perpleja vida,
   ya esperando, ya temiendo:
   es muerte muy conocida,
   y es mucho mejor muriendo
   buscar al dolor salida.
   A mí me fuera interés
   acabar, mas no lo es,
   pues, con discurso mejor,
   me da la vida el temor
   de lo que será después.

En acabando de decir su glosa don Lorenzo, se levantó en pie don Quijote,
y, en voz levantada, que parecía grito, asiendo con su mano la derecha de
don Lorenzo, dijo:

-¡Viven los cielos donde más altos están, mancebo generoso, que sois el
mejor poeta del orbe, y que merecéis estar laureado, no por Chipre ni por
Gaeta, como dijo un poeta, que Dios perdone, sino por las academias de
Atenas, si hoy vivieran, y por las que hoy viven de París, Bolonia y
Salamanca! Plega al cielo que los jueces que os quitaren el premio primero,
Febo los asaetee y las Musas jamás atraviesen los umbrales de sus casas.
Decidme, señor, si sois servido, algunos versos mayores, que quiero tomar
de todo en todo el pulso a vuestro admirable ingenio.

¿No es bueno que dicen que se holgó don Lorenzo de verse alabar de don
Quijote, aunque le tenía por loco? ¡Oh fuerza de la adulación, a cuánto te
estiendes, y cuán dilatados límites son los de tu juridición agradable!
Esta verdad acreditó don Lorenzo, pues concedió con la demanda y deseo de
don Quijote, diciéndole este soneto a la fábula o historia de Píramo y
Tisbe:

Soneto

   El muro rompe la doncella hermosa
   que de Píramo abrió el gallardo pecho:
   parte el Amor de Chipre, y va derecho
   a ver la quiebra estrecha y prodigiosa.
   Habla el silencio allí, porque no osa
   la voz entrar por tan estrecho estrecho;
   las almas sí, que amor suele de hecho
   facilitar la más difícil cosa.
   Salió el deseo de compás, y el paso
   de la imprudente virgen solicita
   por su gusto su muerte; ved qué historia:
   que a entrambos en un punto, ¡oh estraño caso!,
   los mata, los encubre y resucita
   una espada, un sepulcro, una memoria.

-¡Bendito sea Dios! -dijo don Quijote habiendo oído el soneto a don
Lorenzo-, que entre los infinitos poetas consumidos que hay, he visto un
consumado poeta, como lo es vuesa merced, señor mío; que así me lo da a
entender el artificio deste soneto.

Cuatro días estuvo don Quijote regaladísimo en la casa de don Diego, al
cabo de los cuales le pidió licencia para irse, diciéndole que le agradecía
la merced y buen tratamiento que en su casa había recebido; pero que, por
no parecer bien que los caballeros andantes se den muchas horas a ocio y al
regalo, se quería ir a cumplir con su oficio, buscando las aventuras, de
quien tenía noticia que aquella tierra abundaba, donde esperaba entretener
el tiempo hasta que llegase el día de las justas de Zaragoza, que era el de
su derecha derrota; y que primero había de entrar en la cueva de
Montesinos, de quien tantas y tan admirables cosas en aquellos contornos se
contaban, sabiendo e inquiriendo asimismo el nacimiento y verdaderos
manantiales de las siete lagunas llamadas comúnmente de Ruidera.

Don Diego y su hijo le alabaron su honrosa determinación, y le dijeron que
tomase de su casa y de su hacienda todo lo que en grado le viniese, que le
servirían con la voluntad posible; que a ello les obligaba el valor de su
persona y la honrosa profesión suya.

Llegóse, en fin, el día de su partida, tan alegre para don Quijote como
triste y aciago para Sancho Panza, que se hallaba muy bien con la
abundancia de la casa de don Diego, y rehusaba de volver a la hambre que se
usa en las florestas, despoblados, y a la estrecheza de sus mal proveídas
alforjas. Con todo esto, las llenó y colmó de lo más necesario que le
pareció; y al despedirse dijo don Quijote a don Lorenzo:

-No sé si he dicho a vuesa merced otra vez, y si lo he dicho lo vuelvo a
decir, que cuando vuesa merced quisiere ahorrar caminos y trabajos para
llegar a la inacesible cumbre del templo de la Fama, no tiene que hacer
otra cosa sino dejar a una parte la senda de la poesía, algo estrecha, y
tomar la estrechísima de la andante caballería, bastante para hacerle
emperador en daca las pajas.

Con estas razones acabó don Quijote de cerrar el proceso de su locura, y
más con las que añadió, diciendo:

-Sabe Dios si quisiera llevar conmigo al señor don Lorenzo, para enseñarle
cómo se han de perdonar los sujetos, y supeditar y acocear los soberbios,
virtudes anejas a la profesión que yo profeso; pero, pues no lo pide su
poca edad, ni lo querrán consentir sus loables ejercicios, sólo me contento
con advertirle a vuesa merced que, siendo poeta, podrá ser famoso si se
guía más por el parecer ajeno que por el propio, porque no hay padre ni
madre a quien sus hijos le parezcan feos, y en los que lo son del
entendimiento corre más este engaño.

De nuevo se admiraron padre y hijo de las entremetidas razones de don
Quijote, ya discretas y ya disparatadas, y del tema y tesón que llevaba de
acudir de todo en todo a la busca de sus desventuradas aventuras, que las
tenía por fin y blanco de sus deseos. Reiteráronse los ofrecimientos y
comedimientos, y, con la buena licencia de la señora del castillo, don
Quijote y Sancho, sobre Rocinante y el rucio, se partieron.





Capítulo XIX. Donde se cuenta la aventura del pastor enamorado, con otros
en verdad graciosos sucesos


Poco trecho se había alongado don Quijote del lugar de don Diego, cuando
encontró con dos como clérigos o como estudiantes y con dos labradores que
sobre cuatro bestias asnales venían caballeros. El uno de los estudiantes
traía, como en portamanteo, en un lienzo de bocací verde envuelto, al
parecer, un poco de grana blanca y dos pares de medias de cordellate; el
otro no traía otra cosa que dos espadas negras de esgrima, nuevas, y con
sus zapatillas. Los labradores traían otras cosas, que daban indicio y
señal que venían de alguna villa grande, donde las habían comprado, y las
llevaban a su aldea; y así estudiantes como labradores cayeron en la misma
admiración en que caían todos aquellos que la vez primera veían a don
Quijote, y morían por saber qué hombre fuese aquél tan fuera del uso de los
otros hombres.

Saludóles don Quijote, y, después de saber el camino que llevaban, que era
el mesmo que él hacía, les ofreció su compañía, y les pidió detuviesen el
paso, porque caminaban más sus pollinas que su caballo; y, para obligarlos,
en breves razones les dijo quién era, y su oficio y profesión, que era de
caballero andante que iba a buscar las aventuras por todas las partes del
mundo. Díjoles que se llamaba de nombre propio don Quijote de la Mancha, y
por el apelativo, el Caballero de los Leones. Todo esto para los labradores
era hablarles en griego o en jerigonza, pero no para los estudiantes, que
luego entendieron la flaqueza del celebro de don Quijote; pero, con todo
eso, le miraban con admiración y con respecto, y uno dellos le dijo:

-Si vuestra merced, señor caballero, no lleva camino determinado, como no
le suelen llevar los que buscan las aventuras, vuesa merced se venga con
nosotros: verá una de las mejores bodas y más ricas que hasta el día de hoy
se habrán celebrado en la Mancha, ni en otras muchas leguas a la redonda.

Preguntóle don Quijote si eran de algún príncipe, que así las ponderaba.

-No son -respondió el estudiante- sino de un labrador y una labradora: él,
el más rico de toda esta tierra; y ella, la más hermosa que han visto los
hombres. El aparato con que se han de hacer es estraordinario y nuevo,
porque se han de celebrar en un prado que está junto al pueblo de la novia,
a quien por excelencia llaman Quiteria la hermosa, y el desposado se llama
Camacho el rico; ella de edad de diez y ocho años, y él de veinte y dos;
ambos para en uno, aunque algunos curiosos que tienen de memoria los
linajes de todo el mundo quieren decir que el de la hermosa Quiteria se
aventaja al de Camacho; pero ya no se mira en esto, que las riquezas son
poderosas de soldar muchas quiebras. En efecto, el tal Camacho es liberal y
hásele antojado de enramar y cubrir todo el prado por arriba, de tal suerte
que el sol se ha de ver en trabajo si quiere entrar a visitar las yerbas
verdes de que está cubierto el suelo. Tiene asimesmo maheridas danzas, así
de espadas como de cascabel menudo, que hay en su pueblo quien los repique
y sacuda por estremo; de zapateadores no digo nada, que es un juicio los
que tiene muñidos; pero ninguna de las cosas referidas ni otras muchas que
he dejado de referir ha de hacer más memorables estas bodas, sino las que
imagino que hará en ellas el despechado Basilio. Es este Basilio un zagal
vecino del mesmo lugar de Quiteria, el cual tenía su casa pared y medio de
la de los padres de Quiteria, de donde tomó ocasión el amor de renovar al
mundo los ya olvidados amores de Píramo y Tisbe, porque Basilio se enamoró
de Quiteria desde sus tiernos y primeros años, y ella fue correspondiendo a
su deseo con mil honestos favores, tanto, que se contaban por
entretenimiento en el pueblo los amores de los dos niños Basilio y
Quiteria. Fue creciendo la edad, y acordó el padre de Quiteria de estorbar
a Basilio la ordinaria entrada que en su casa tenía; y, por quitarse de
andar receloso y lleno de sospechas, ordenó de casar a su hija con el rico
Camacho, no pareciéndole ser bien casarla con Basilio, que no tenía tantos
bienes de fortuna como de naturaleza; pues si va a decir las verdades sin
invidia, él es el más ágil mancebo que conocemos: gran tirador de barra,
luchador estremado y gran jugador de pelota; corre como un gamo, salta más
que una cabra y birla a los bolos como por encantamento; canta como una
calandria, y toca una guitarra, que la hace hablar, y, sobre todo, juega
una espada como el más pintado.

-Por esa sola gracia -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, merecía ese mancebo
no sólo casarse con la hermosa Quiteria, sino con la mesma reina Ginebra,
si fuera hoy viva, a pesar de Lanzarote y de todos aquellos que estorbarlo
quisieran.

-¡A mi mujer con eso! -dijo Sancho Panza, que hasta entonces había ido
callando y escuchando-, la cual no quiere sino que cada uno case con su
igual, ateniéndose al refrán que dicen "cada oveja con su pareja". Lo que
yo quisiera es que ese buen Basilio, que ya me le voy aficionando, se
casara con esa señora Quiteria; que buen siglo hayan y buen poso, iba a
decir al revés, los que estorban que se casen los que bien se quieren.

-Si todos los que bien se quieren se hubiesen de casar -dijo don Quijote-,
quitaríase la eleción y juridición a los padres de casar sus hijos con
quien y cuando deben; y si a la voluntad de las hijas quedase escoger los
maridos, tal habría que escogiese al criado de su padre, y tal al que vio
pasar por la calle, a su parecer, bizarro y entonado, aunque fuese un
desbaratado espadachín; que el amor y la afición con facilidad ciegan los
ojos del entendimiento, tan necesarios para escoger estado, y el del
matrimonio está muy a peligro de errarse, y es menester gran tiento y
particular favor del cielo para acertarle. Quiere hacer uno un viaje largo,
y si es prudente, antes de ponerse en camino busca alguna compañía segura y
apacible con quien acompañarse; pues, ¿por qué no hará lo mesmo el que ha
de caminar toda la vida, hasta el paradero de la muerte, y más si la
compañía le ha de acompañar en la cama, en la mesa y en todas partes, como
es la de la mujer con su marido? La de la propia mujer no es mercaduría que
una vez comprada se vuelve, o se trueca o cambia, porque es accidente
inseparable, que dura lo que dura la vida: es un lazo que si una vez le
echáis al cuello, se vuelve en el nudo gordiano, que si no le corta la
guadaña de la muerte, no hay desatarle. Muchas más cosas pudiera decir en
esta materia, si no lo estorbara el deseo que tengo de saber si le queda
más que decir al señor licenciado acerca de la historia de Basilio.

A lo que respondió el estudiante bachiller, o licenciado, como le llamó don
Quijote, que:

-De todo no me queda más que decir sino que desde el punto que Basilio supo
que la hermosa Quiteria se casaba con Camacho el rico, nunca más le han
visto reír ni hablar razón concertada, y siempre anda pensativo y triste,
hablando entre sí mismo, con que da ciertas y claras señales de que se le
ha vuelto el juicio: come poco y duerme poco, y lo que come son frutas, y
en lo que duerme, si duerme, es en el campo, sobre la dura tierra, como
animal bruto; mira de cuando en cuando al cielo, y otras veces clava los
ojos en la tierra, con tal embelesamiento, que no parece sino estatua
vestida que el aire le mueve la ropa. En fin, él da tales muestras de tener
apasionado el corazón, que tememos todos los que le conocemos que el dar el
sí mañana la hermosa Quiteria ha de ser la sentencia de su muerte.

-Dios lo hará mejor -dijo Sancho-; que Dios, que da la llaga, da la
medicina; nadie sabe lo que está por venir: de aquí a mañana muchas horas
hay, y en una, y aun en un momento, se cae la casa; yo he visto llover y
hacer sol, todo a un mesmo punto; tal se acuesta sano la noche, que no se
puede mover otro día. Y díganme, ¿por ventura habrá quien se alabe que
tiene echado un clavo a la rodaja de la Fortuna? No, por cierto; y entre el
sí y el no de la mujer no me atrevería yo a poner una punta de alfiler,
porque no cabría. Denme a mí que Quiteria quiera de buen corazón y de buena
voluntad a Basilio, que yo le daré a él un saco de buena ventura: que el
amor, según yo he oído decir, mira con unos antojos que hacen parecer oro
al cobre, a la pobreza riqueza, y a las lagañas perlas.

-¿Adónde vas a parar, Sancho, que seas maldito? -dijo don Quijote-; que
cuando comienzas a ensartar refranes y cuentos, no te puede esperar sino el
mesmo Judas, que te lleve. Dime, animal, ¿qué sabes tú de clavos, ni de
rodajas, ni de otra cosa ninguna?

-¡Oh! Pues si no me entienden -respondió Sancho-, no es maravilla que mis
sentencias sean tenidas por disparates. Pero no importa: yo me entiendo, y
sé que no he dicho muchas necedades en lo que he dicho; sino que vuesa
merced, señor mío, siempre es friscal de mis dichos, y aun de mis hechos.

-Fiscal has de decir -dijo don Quijote-, que no friscal, prevaricador del
buen lenguaje, que Dios te confunda.

-No se apunte vuestra merced conmigo -respondió Sancho-, pues sabe que no
me he criado en la Corte, ni he estudiado en Salamanca, para saber si añado
o quito alguna letra a mis vocablos. Sí, que, ¡válgame Dios!, no hay para
qué obligar al sayagués a que hable como el toledano, y toledanos puede
haber que no las corten en el aire en esto del hablar polido.

-Así es -dijo el licenciado-, porque no pueden hablar tan bien los que se
crían en las Tenerías y en Zocodover como los que se pasean casi todo el
día por el claustro de la Iglesia Mayor, y todos son toledanos. El lenguaje
puro, el propio, el elegante y claro, está en los discretos cortesanos,
aunque hayan nacido en Majalahonda: dije discretos porque hay muchos que no
lo son, y la discreción es la gramática del buen lenguaje, que se acompaña
con el uso. Yo, señores, por mis pecados, he estudiado Cánones en
Salamanca, y pícome algún tanto de decir mi razón con palabras claras,
llanas y significantes.

-Si no os picáredes más de saber más menear las negras que lleváis que la
lengua -dijo el otro estudiante-, vos llevárades el primero en licencias,
como llevastes cola.

-Mirad, bachiller -respondió el licenciado-: vos estáis en la más errada
opinión del mundo acerca de la destreza de la espada, teniéndola por vana.

-Para mí no es opinión, sino verdad asentada -replicó Corchuelo-; y si
queréis que os lo muestre con la experiencia, espadas traéis, comodidad
hay, yo pulsos y fuerzas tengo, que acompañadas de mi ánimo, que no es
poco, os harán confesar que yo no me engaño. Apeaos, y usad de vuestro
compás de pies, de vuestros círculos y vuestros ángulos y ciencia; que yo
espero de haceros ver estrellas a mediodía con mi destreza moderna y zafia,
en quien espero, después de Dios, que está por nacer hombre que me haga
volver las espaldas, y que no le hay en el mundo a quien yo no le haga
perder tierra.

-En eso de volver, o no, las espaldas no me meto -replico el diestro-;
aunque podría ser que en la parte donde la vez primera clavásedes el pie,
allí os abriesen la sepultura: quiero decir que allí quedásedes muerto por
la despreciada destreza.

-Ahora se verá -respondió Corchuelo.

Y, apeándose con gran presteza de su jumento, tiró con furia de una de las
espadas que llevaba el licenciado en el suyo.

-No ha de ser así -dijo a este instante don Quijote-, que yo quiero ser el
maestro desta esgrima, y el juez desta muchas veces no averiguada cuestión.

Y, apeándose de Rocinante y asiendo de su lanza, se puso en la mitad del
camino, a tiempo que ya el licenciado, con gentil donaire de cuerpo y
compás de pies, se iba contra Corchuelo, que contra él se vino, lanzando,
como decirse suele, fuego por los ojos. Los otros dos labradores del
acompañamiento, sin apearse de sus pollinas, sirvieron de aspetatores en la
mortal tragedia. Las cuchilladas, estocadas, altibajos, reveses y mandobles
que tiraba Corchuelo eran sin número, más espesas que hígado y más menudas
que granizo. Arremetía como un león irritado, pero salíale al encuentro un
tapaboca de la zapatilla de la espada del licenciado, que en mitad de su
furia le detenía, y se la hacía besar como si fuera reliquia, aunque no con
tanta devoción como las reliquias deben y suelen besarse.

Finalmente, el licenciado le contó a estocadas todos los botones de una
media sotanilla que traía vestida, haciéndole tiras los faldamentos, como
colas de pulpo; derribóle el sombrero dos veces, y cansóle de manera que de
despecho, cólera y rabia asió la espada por la empuñadura, y arrojóla por
el aire con tanta fuerza, que uno de los labradores asistentes, que era
escribano, que fue por ella, dio después por testimonio que la alongó de sí
casi tres cuartos de legua; el cual testimonio sirve y ha servido para que
se conozca y vea con toda verdad cómo la fuerza es vencida del arte.

Sentóse cansado Corchuelo, y llegándose a él Sancho, le dijo:

-Mía fe, señor bachiller, si vuesa merced toma mi consejo, de aquí adelante
no ha de desafiar a nadie a esgrimir, sino a luchar o a tirar la barra,
pues tiene edad y fuerzas para ello; que destos a quien llaman diestros he
oído decir que meten una punta de una espada por el ojo de una aguja.

-Yo me contento -respondió Corchuelo- de haber caído de mi burra, y de que
me haya mostrado la experiencia la verdad, de quien tan lejos estaba.

Y, levantándose, abrazó al licenciado, y quedaron más amigos que de antes,
y no queriendo esperar al escribano, que había ido por la espada, por
parecerle que tardaría mucho; y así, determinaron seguir, por llegar
temprano a la aldea de Quiteria, de donde todos eran.

En lo que faltaba del camino, les fue contando el licenciado las
excelencias de la espada, con tantas razones demostrativas y con tantas
figuras y demostraciones matemáticas, que todos quedaron enterados de la
bondad de la ciencia, y Corchuelo reducido de su pertinacia.

Era anochecido, pero antes que llegasen les pareció a todos que estaba
delante del pueblo un cielo lleno de inumerables y resplandecientes
estrellas. Oyeron, asimismo, confusos y suaves sonidos de diversos
instrumentos, como de flautas, tamborinos, salterios, albogues, panderos y
sonajas; y cuando llegaron cerca vieron que los árboles de una enramada,
que a mano habían puesto a la entrada del pueblo, estaban todos llenos de
luminarias, a quien no ofendía el viento, que entonces no soplaba sino tan
manso que no tenía fuerza para mover las hojas de los árboles. Los músicos
eran los regocijadores de la boda, que en diversas cuadrillas por aquel
agradable sitio andaban, unos bailando, y otros cantando, y otros tocando
la diversidad de los referidos instrumentos. En efecto, no parecía sino que
por todo aquel prado andaba corriendo la alegría y saltando el contento.

Otros muchos andaban ocupados en levantar andamios, de donde con comodidad
pudiesen ver otro día las representaciones y danzas que se habían de hacer
en aquel lugar dedicado para solenizar las bodas del rico Camacho y las
exequias de Basilio. No quiso entrar en el lugar don Quijote, aunque se lo
pidieron así el labrador como el bachiller; pero él dio por disculpa,
bastantísima a su parecer, ser costumbre de los caballeros andantes dormir
por los campos y florestas antes que en los poblados, aunque fuese debajo
de dorados techos; y con esto, se desvió un poco del camino, bien contra la
voluntad de Sancho, viniéndosele a la memoria el buen alojamiento que había
tenido en el castillo o casa de don Diego.





Capítulo XX. Donde se cuentan las bodas de Camacho el rico, con el suceso
de Basilio el pobre


Apenas la blanca aurora había dado lugar a que el luciente Febo, con el
ardor de sus calientes rayos, las líquidas perlas de sus cabellos de oro
enjugase, cuando don Quijote, sacudiendo la pereza de sus miembros, se puso
en pie y llamó a su escudero Sancho, que aún todavía roncaba; lo cual visto
por don Quijote, antes que le despertase, le dijo:

-¡Oh tú, bienaventurado sobre cuantos viven sobre la haz de la tierra, pues
sin tener invidia ni ser invidiado, duermes con sosegado espíritu, ni te
persiguen encantadores, ni sobresaltan encantamentos! Duerme, digo otra
vez, y lo diré otras ciento, sin que te tengan en contina vigilia celos de
tu dama, ni te desvelen pensamientos de pagar deudas que debas, ni de lo
que has de hacer para comer otro día tú y tu pequeña y angustiada familia.
Ni la ambición te inquieta, ni la pompa vana del mundo te fatiga, pues los
límites de tus deseos no se estienden a más que a pensar tu jumento; que el
de tu persona sobre mis hombros le tienes puesto: contrapeso y carga que
puso la naturaleza y la costumbre a los señores. Duerme el criado, y está
velando el señor, pensando cómo le ha de sustentar, mejorar y hacer
mercedes. La congoja de ver que el cielo se hace de bronce sin acudir a la
tierra con el conveniente rocío no aflige al criado, sino al señor, que ha
de sustentar en la esterilidad y hambre al que le sirvió en la fertilidad y
abundancia.

A todo esto no respondió Sancho, porque dormía, ni despertara tan presto si
don Quijote con el cuento de la lanza no le hiciere volver en sí. Despertó,
en fin, soñoliento y perezoso, y, volviendo el rostro a todas partes, dijo:

-De la parte desta enramada, si no me engaño, sale un tufo y olor harto más
de torreznos asados que de juncos y tomillos: bodas que por tales olores
comienzan, para mi santiguada que deben de ser abundantes y generosas.

-Acaba, glotón -dijo don Quijote-; ven, iremos a ver estos desposorios, por
ver lo que hace el desdeñado Basilio.

-Mas que haga lo que quisiere -respondió Sancho-: no fuera él pobre y
casárase con Quiteria. ¿No hay más sino tener un cuarto y querer alzarse
por las nubes? A la fe, señor, yo soy de parecer que el pobre debe de
contentarse con lo que hallare, y no pedir cotufas en el golfo. Yo apostaré
un brazo que puede Camacho envolver en reales a Basilio; y si esto es así,
como debe de ser, bien boba fuera Quiteria en desechar las galas y las
joyas que le debe de haber dado, y le puede dar Camacho, por escoger el
tirar de la barra y el jugar de la negra de Basilio. Sobre un buen tiro de
barra o sobre una gentil treta de espada no dan un cuartillo de vino en la
taberna. Habilidades y gracias que no son vendibles, mas que las tenga el
conde Dirlos; pero, cuando las tales gracias caen sobre quien tiene buen
dinero, tal sea mi vida como ellas parecen. Sobre un buen cimiento se puede
levantar un buen edificio, y el mejor cimiento y zanja del mundo es el
dinero.

-Por quien Dios es, Sancho -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, que concluyas
con tu arenga; que tengo para mí que si te dejasen seguir en las que a cada
paso comienzas, no te quedaría tiempo para comer ni para dormir, que todo
le gastarías en hablar.

-Si vuestra merced tuviera buena memoria -replicó Sancho-, debiérase
acordar de los capítulos de nuestro concierto antes que esta última vez
saliésemos de casa: uno dellos fue que me había de dejar hablar todo
aquello que quisiese, con que no fuese contra el prójimo ni contra la
autoridad de vuesa merced; y hasta agora me parece que no he contravenido
contra el tal capítulo.

-Yo no me acuerdo, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, del tal capítulo; y,
puesto que sea así, quiero que calles y vengas, que ya los instrumentos que
anoche oímos vuelven a alegrar los valles, y sin duda los desposorios se
celebrarán en el frescor de la mañana, y no en el calor de la tarde.

Hizo Sancho lo que su señor le mandaba, y, poniendo la silla a Rocinante y
la albarda al rucio, subieron los dos, y paso ante paso se fueron entrando
por la enramada.

Lo primero que se le ofreció a la vista de Sancho fue, espetado en un
asador de un olmo entero, un entero novillo; y en el fuego donde se había
de asar ardía un mediano monte de leña, y seis ollas que alrededor de la
hoguera estaban no se habían hecho en la común turquesa de las demás ollas,
porque eran seis medias tinajas, que cada una cabía un rastro de carne: así
embebían y encerraban en sí carneros enteros, sin echarse de ver, como si
fueran palominos; las liebres ya sin pellejo y las gallinas sin pluma que
estaban colgadas por los árboles para sepultarlas en las ollas no tenían
número; los pájaros y caza de diversos géneros eran infinitos, colgados de
los árboles para que el aire los enfriase.

Contó Sancho más de sesenta zaques de más de a dos arrobas cada uno, y
todos llenos, según después pareció, de generosos vinos; así había rimeros
de pan blanquísimo, como los suele haber de montones de trigo en las eras;
los quesos, puestos como ladrillos enrejados, formaban una muralla, y dos
calderas de aceite, mayores que las de un tinte, servían de freír cosas de
masa, que con dos valientes palas las sacaban fritas y las zabullían en
otra caldera de preparada miel que allí junto estaba.

Los cocineros y cocineras pasaban de cincuenta: todos limpios, todos
diligentes y todos contentos. En el dilatado vientre del novillo estaban
doce tiernos y pequeños lechones, que, cosidos por encima, servían de darle
sabor y enternecerle. Las especias de diversas suertes no parecía haberlas
comprado por libras, sino por arrobas, y todas estaban de manifiesto en una
grande arca. Finalmente, el aparato de la boda era rústico, pero tan
abundante que podía sustentar a un ejército.

Todo lo miraba Sancho Panza, y todo lo contemplaba, y de todo se
aficionaba: primero le cautivaron y rindieron el deseo las ollas, de quién
él tomara de bonísima gana un mediano puchero; luego le aficionaron la
voluntad los zaques; y, últimamente, las frutas de sartén, si es que se
podían llamar sartenes las tan orondas calderas; y así, sin poderlo sufrir
ni ser en su mano hacer otra cosa, se llegó a uno de los solícitos
cocineros, y, con corteses y hambrientas razones, le rogó le dejase mojar
un mendrugo de pan en una de aquellas ollas. A lo que el cocinero
respondió:

-Hermano, este día no es de aquellos sobre quien tiene juridición la
hambre, merced al rico Camacho. Apeaos y mirad si hay por ahí un cucharón,
y espumad una gallina o dos, y buen provecho os hagan.

-No veo ninguno -respondió Sancho.

-Esperad -dijo el cocinero-. ¡Pecador de mí, y qué melindroso y para poco
debéis de ser!

Y, diciendo esto, asió de un caldero, y, encajándole en una de las medias
tinajas, sacó en él tres gallinas y dos gansos, y dijo a Sancho:

-Comed, amigo, y desayunaos con esta espuma, en tanto que se llega la hora
del yantar.

-No tengo en qué echarla -respondió Sancho.

-Pues llevaos -dijo el cocinero- la cuchara y todo, que la riqueza y el
contento de Camacho todo lo suple.

En tanto, pues, que esto pasaba Sancho, estaba don Quijote mirando cómo,
por una parte de la enramada, entraban hasta doce labradores sobre doce
hermosísimas yeguas, con ricos y vistosos jaeces de campo y con muchos
cascabeles en los petrales, y todos vestidos de regocijo y fiestas; los
cuales, en concertado tropel, corrieron no una, sino muchas carreras por el
prado, con regocijada algazara y grita, diciendo:

-¡Vivan Camacho y Quiteria: él tan rico como ella hermosa, y ella la más
hermosa del mundo!

Oyendo lo cual don Quijote, dijo entre sí:

-Bien parece que éstos no han visto a mi Dulcinea del Toboso, que si la
hubieran visto, ellos se fueran a la mano en las alabanzas desta su
Quiteria.

De allí a poco comenzaron a entrar por diversas partes de la enramada
muchas y diferentes danzas, entre las cuales venía una de espadas, de hasta
veinte y cuatro zagales de gallardo parecer y brío, todos vestidos de
delgado y blanquísimo lienzo, con sus paños de tocar, labrados de varias
colores de fina seda; y al que los guiaba, que era un ligero mancebo,
preguntó uno de los de las yeguas si se había herido alguno de los
danzantes.

-Por ahora, bendito sea Dios, no se ha herido nadie: todos vamos sanos.

Y luego comenzó a enredarse con los demás compañeros, con tantas vueltas y
con tanta destreza que, aunque don Quijote estaba hecho a ver semejantes
danzas, ninguna le había parecido tan bien como aquélla.

También le pareció bien otra que entró de doncellas hermosísimas, tan mozas
que, al parecer, ninguna bajaba de catorce ni llegaba a diez y ocho años,
vestidas todas de palmilla verde, los cabellos parte tranzados y parte
sueltos, pero todos tan rubios, que con los del sol podían tener
competencia, sobre los cuales traían guirnaldas de jazmines, rosas,
amaranto y madreselva compuestas. Guiábalas un venerable viejo y una
anciana matrona, pero más ligeros y sueltos que sus años prometían.
Hacíales el son una gaita zamorana, y ellas, llevando en los rostros y en
los ojos a la honestidad y en los pies a la ligereza, se mostraban las
mejores bailadoras del mundo.

Tras ésta entró otra danza de artificio y de las que llaman habladas. Era
de ocho ninfas, repartidas en dos hileras: de la una hilera era guía el
dios Cupido, y de la otra, el Interés; aquél, adornado de alas, arco,
aljaba y saetas; éste, vestido de ricas y diversas colores de oro y seda.
Las ninfas que al Amor seguían traían a las espaldas, en pargamino blanco y
letras grandes, escritos sus nombres: poesía era el título de la primera,
el de la segunda discreción, el de la tercera buen linaje, el de la cuarta
valentía; del modo mesmo venían señaladas las que al Interés seguían: decía
liberalidad el título de la primera, dádiva el de la segunda, tesoro el de
la tercera y el de la cuarta posesión pacífica. Delante de todos venía un
castillo de madera, a quien tiraban cuatro salvajes, todos vestidos de
yedra y de cáñamo teñido de verde, tan al natural, que por poco espantaran
a Sancho. En la frontera del castillo y en todas cuatro partes de sus
cuadros traía escrito: castillo del buen recato. Hacíanles el son cuatro
diestros tañedores de tamboril y flauta.

Comenzaba la danza Cupido, y, habiendo hecho dos mudanzas, alzaba los ojos
y flechaba el arco contra una doncella que se ponía entre las almenas del
castillo, a la cual desta suerte dijo:

   -Yo soy el dios poderoso
   en el aire y en la tierra
   y en el ancho mar undoso,
   y en cuanto el abismo encierra
   en su báratro espantoso.
   Nunca conocí qué es miedo;
   todo cuanto quiero puedo,
   aunque quiera lo imposible,
   y en todo lo que es posible
   mando, quito, pongo y vedo.

Acabó la copla, disparó una flecha por lo alto del castillo y retiróse a
su puesto. Salió luego el Interés, y hizo otras dos mudanzas; callaron los
tamborinos, y él dijo:

   -Soy quien puede más que Amor,
   y es Amor el que me guía;
   soy de la estirpe mejor
   que el cielo en la tierra cría,
   más conocida y mayor.
   Soy el Interés, en quien
   pocos suelen obrar bien,
   y obrar sin mí es gran milagro;
   y cual soy te me consagro,
   por siempre jamás, amén.

Retiróse el Interés, y hízose adelante la Poesía; la cual, después de haber
hecho sus mudanzas como los demás, puestos los ojos en la doncella del
castillo, dijo:

   -En dulcísimos conceptos,
   la dulcísima Poesía,
   altos, graves y discretos,
   señora, el alma te envía
   envuelta entre mil sonetos.
   Si acaso no te importuna
   mi porfía, tu fortuna,
   de otras muchas invidiada,
   será por mí levantada
   sobre el cerco de la luna.

Desvióse la Poesía, y de la parte del Interés salió la Liberalidad, y,
después de hechas sus mudanzas, dijo:

   -Llaman Liberalidad
   al dar que el estremo huye
   de la prodigalidad,
   y del contrario, que arguye
   tibia y floja voluntad.
   Mas yo, por te engrandecer,
   de hoy más, pródiga he de ser;
   que, aunque es vicio, es vicio honrado
   y de pecho enamorado,
   que en el dar se echa de ver.

Deste modo salieron y se retiraron todas las dos figuras de las dos
escuadras, y cada uno hizo sus mudanzas y dijo sus versos, algunos
elegantes y algunos ridículos, y sólo tomó de memoria don Quijote -que la
tenía grande- los ya referidos; y luego se mezclaron todos, haciendo y
deshaciendo lazos con gentil donaire y desenvoltura; y cuando pasaba el
Amor por delante del castillo, disparaba por alto sus flechas, pero el
Interés quebraba en él alcancías doradas.

Finalmente, después de haber bailado un buen espacio, el Interés sacó un
bolsón, que le formaba el pellejo de un gran gato romano, que parecía estar
lleno de dineros, y, arrojándole al castillo, con el golpe se desencajaron
las tablas y se cayeron, dejando a la doncella descubierta y sin defensa
alguna. Llegó el Interés con las figuras de su valía, y, echándola una gran
cadena de oro al cuello, mostraron prenderla, rendirla y cautivarla; lo
cual visto por el Amor y sus valedores, hicieron ademán de quitársela; y
todas las demostraciones que hacían eran al son de los tamborinos, bailando
y danzando concertadamente. Pusiéronlos en paz los salvajes, los cuales con
mucha presteza volvieron a armar y a encajar las tablas del castillo, y la
doncella se encerró en él como de nuevo, y con esto se acabó la danza con
gran contento de los que la miraban.

Preguntó don Quijote a una de las ninfas que quién la había compuesto y
ordenado. Respondióle que un beneficiado de aquel pueblo, que tenía gentil
caletre para semejantes invenciones.

-Yo apostaré -dijo don Quijote- que debe de ser más amigo de Camacho que de
Basilio el tal bachiller o beneficiado, y que debe de tener más de satírico
que de vísperas: ¡bien ha encajado en la danza las habilidades de Basilio y
las riquezas de Camacho!

Sancho Panza, que lo escuchaba todo, dijo:

-El rey es mi gallo: a Camacho me atengo.

-En fin -dijo don Quijote-, bien se parece, Sancho, que eres villano y de
aquéllos que dicen: "¡Viva quien vence!"

-No sé de los que soy -respondió Sancho-, pero bien sé que nunca de ollas
de Basilio sacaré yo tan elegante espuma como es esta que he sacado de las
de Camacho.

Y enseñóle el caldero lleno de gansos y de gallinas, y, asiendo de una,
comenzó a comer con mucho donaire y gana, y dijo:

-¡A la barba de las habilidades de Basilio!, que tanto vales cuanto tienes,
y tanto tienes cuanto vales. Dos linajes solos hay en el mundo, como decía
una agüela mía, que son el tener y el no tener, aunque ella al del tener se
atenía; y el día de hoy, mi señor don Quijote, antes se toma el pulso al
haber que al saber: un asno cubierto de oro parece mejor que un caballo
enalbardado. Así que vuelvo a decir que a Camacho me atengo, de cuyas ollas
son abundantes espumas gansos y gallinas, liebres y conejos; y de las de
Basilio serán, si viene a mano, y aunque no venga sino al pie, aguachirle.

-¿Has acabado tu arenga, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-Habréla acabado -respondió Sancho-, porque veo que vuestra merced recibe
pesadumbre con ella; que si esto no se pusiera de por medio, obra había
cortada para tres días.

-Plega a Dios, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-, que yo te vea mudo antes que
me muera.

-Al paso que llevamos -respondió Sancho-, antes que vuestra merced se muera
estaré yo mascando barro, y entonces podrá ser que esté tan mudo que no
hable palabra hasta la fin del mundo, o, por lo menos, hasta el día del
Juicio.

-Aunque eso así suceda, ¡oh Sancho! -respondió don Quijote-, nunca llegará
tu silencio a do ha llegado lo que has hablado, hablas y tienes de hablar
en tu vida; y más, que está muy puesto en razón natural que primero llegue
el día de mi muerte que el de la tuya; y así, jamás pienso verte mudo, ni
aun cuando estés bebiendo o durmiendo, que es lo que puedo encarecer.

-A buena fe, señor -respondió Sancho-, que no hay que fiar en la
descarnada, digo, en la muerte, la cual también come cordero como carnero;
y a nuestro cura he oído decir que con igual pie pisaba las altas torres de
los reyes como las humildes chozas de los pobres. Tiene esta señora más de
poder que de melindre: no es nada asquerosa, de todo come y a todo hace, y
de toda suerte de gentes, edades y preeminencias hinche sus alforjas. No es
segador que duerme las siestas, que a todas horas siega, y corta así la
seca como la verde yerba; y no parece que masca, sino que engulle y traga
cuanto se le pone delante, porque tiene hambre canina, que nunca se harta;
y, aunque no tiene barriga, da a entender que está hidrópica y sedienta de
beber solas las vidas de cuantos viven, como quien se bebe un jarro de agua
fría.

-No más, Sancho -dijo a este punto don Quijote-. Tente en buenas, y no te
dejes caer; que en verdad que lo que has dicho de la muerte por tus
rústicos términos es lo que pudiera decir un buen predicador. Dígote,
Sancho que si como tienes buen natural y discreción, pudieras tomar un
púlpito en la mano y irte por ese mundo predicando lindezas...

-Bien predica quien bien vive -respondió Sancho-, y yo no sé otras
tologías.

-Ni las has menester -dijo don Quijote-; pero yo no acabo de entender ni
alcanzar cómo, siendo el principio de la sabiduría el temor de Dios, tú,
que temes más a un lagarto que a Él, sabes tanto.

-Juzgue vuesa merced, señor, de sus caballerías -respondió Sancho-, y no se
meta en juzgar de los temores o valentías ajenas, que tan gentil temeroso
soy yo de Dios como cada hijo de vecino; y déjeme vuestra merced despabilar
esta espuma, que lo demás todas son palabras ociosas, de que nos han de
pedir cuenta en la otra vida.

Y, diciendo esto, comenzó de nuevo a dar asalto a su caldero, con tan
buenos alientos que despertó los de don Quijote, y sin duda le ayudara, si
no lo impidiera lo que es fuerza se diga adelante.





Capítulo XXI. Donde se prosiguen las bodas de Camacho, con otros gustosos
sucesos


Cuando estaban don Quijote y Sancho en las razones referidas en el capítulo
antecedente, se oyeron grandes voces y gran ruido, y dábanlas y causábanle
los de las yeguas, que con larga carrera y grita iban a recebir a los
novios, que, rodeados de mil géneros de instrumentos y de invenciones,
venían acompañados del cura, y de la parentela de entrambos, y de toda la
gente más lucida de los lugares circunvecinos, todos vestidos de fiesta. Y
como Sancho vio a la novia, dijo:

-A buena fe que no viene vestida de labradora, sino de garrida palaciega.
¡Pardiez, que según diviso, que las patenas que había de traer son ricos
corales, y la palmilla verde de Cuenca es terciopelo de treinta pelos! ¡Y
montas que la guarnición es de tiras de lienzo, blanca!, ¡voto a mí que es
de raso!; pues, ¡tomadme las manos, adornadas con sortijas de azabache!: no
medre yo si no son anillos de oro, y muy de oro, y empedrados con pelras
blancas como una cuajada, que cada una debe de valer un ojo de la cara. ¡Oh
hideputa, y qué cabellos; que, si no son postizos, no los he visto mas
luengos ni más rubios en toda mi vida! ¡No, sino ponedla tacha en el brío y
en el talle, y no la comparéis a una palma que se mueve cargada de racimos
de dátiles, que lo mesmo parecen los dijes que trae pendientes de los
cabellos y de la garganta! Juro en mi ánima que ella es una chapada moza, y
que puede pasar por los bancos de Flandes.

Rióse don Quijote de las rústicas alabanzas de Sancho Panza; parecióle que,
fuera de su señora Dulcinea del Toboso, no había visto mujer más hermosa
jamás. Venía la hermosa Quiteria algo descolorida, y debía de ser de la
mala noche que siempre pasan las novias en componerse para el día venidero
de sus bodas. Íbanse acercando a un teatro que a un lado del prado estaba,
adornado de alfombras y ramos, adonde se habían de hacer los desposorios, y
de donde habían de mirar las danzas y las invenciones; y, a la sazón que
llegaban al puesto, oyeron a sus espaldas grandes voces, y una que decía:

-Esperaos un poco, gente tan inconsiderada como presurosa.

A cuyas voces y palabras todos volvieron la cabeza, y vieron que las daba
un hombre vestido, al parecer, de un sayo negro, jironado de carmesí a
llamas. Venía coronado -como se vio luego- con una corona de funesto
ciprés; en las manos traía un bastón grande. En llegando más cerca, fue
conocido de todos por el gallardo Basilio, y todos estuvieron suspensos,
esperando en qué habían de parar sus voces y sus palabras, temiendo algún
mal suceso de su venida en sazón semejante.

Llegó, en fin, cansado y sin aliento, y, puesto delante de los desposados,
hincando el bastón en el suelo, que tenía el cuento de una punta de acero,
mudada la color, puestos los ojos en Quiteria, con voz tremente y ronca,
estas razones dijo:

-Bien sabes, desconocida Quiteria, que conforme a la santa ley que
profesamos, que viviendo yo, tú no puedes tomar esposo; y juntamente no
ignoras que, por esperar yo que el tiempo y mi diligencia mejorasen los
bienes de mi fortuna, no he querido dejar de guardar el decoro que a tu
honra convenía; pero tú, echando a las espaldas todas las obligaciones que
debes a mi buen deseo, quieres hacer señor de lo que es mío a otro, cuyas
riquezas le sirven no sólo de buena fortuna, sino de bonísima ventura. Y
para que la tenga colmada, y no como yo pienso que la merece, sino como se
la quieren dar los cielos, yo, por mis manos, desharé el imposible o el
inconveniente que puede estorbársela, quitándome a mí de por medio. ¡Viva,
viva el rico Camacho con la ingrata Quiteria largos y felices siglos, y
muera, muera el pobre Basilio, cuya pobreza cortó las alas de su dicha y le
puso en la sepultura!

Y, diciendo esto, asió del bastón que tenía hincado en el suelo, y,
quedándose la mitad dél en la tierra, mostró que servía de vaina a un
mediano estoque que en él se ocultaba; y, puesta la que se podía llamar
empuñadura en el suelo, con ligero desenfado y determinado propósito se
arrojó sobre él, y en un punto mostró la punta sangrienta a las espaldas,
con la mitad del acerada cuchilla, quedando el triste bañado en su sangre y
tendido en el suelo, de sus mismas armas traspasado.

Acudieron luego sus amigos a favorecerle, condolidos de su miseria y
lastimosa desgracia; y, dejando don Quijote a Rocinante, acudió a
favorecerle y le tomó en sus brazos, y halló que aún no había espirado.
Quisiéronle sacar el estoque, pero el cura, que estaba presente, fue de
parecer que no se le sacasen antes de confesarle, porque el sacársele y el
espirar sería todo a un tiempo. Pero, volviendo un poco en sí Basilio, con
voz doliente y desmayada dijo:

-Si quisieses, cruel Quiteria, darme en este último y forzoso trance la
mano de esposa, aún pensaría que mi temeridad tendría desculpa, pues en
ella alcancé el bien de ser tuyo.

El cura, oyendo lo cual, le dijo que atendiese a la salud del alma antes
que a los gustos del cuerpo, y que pidiese muy de veras a Dios perdón de
sus pecados y de su desesperada determinación. A lo cual replicó Basilio
que en ninguna manera se confesaría si primero Quiteria no le daba la mano
de ser su esposa: que aquel contento le adobaría la voluntad y le daría
aliento para confesarse.

En oyendo don Quijote la petición del herido, en altas voces dijo que
Basilio pedía una cosa muy justa y puesta en razón, y además, muy hacedera,
y que el señor Camacho quedaría tan honrado recibiendo a la señora Quiteria
viuda del valeroso Basilio como si la recibiera del lado de su padre:

-Aquí no ha de haber más de un sí, que no tenga otro efecto que el
pronunciarle, pues el tálamo de estas bodas ha de ser la sepultura.

Todo lo oía Camacho, y todo le tenía suspenso y confuso, sin saber qué
hacer ni qué decir; pero las voces de los amigos de Basilio fueron tantas,
pidiéndole que consintiese que Quiteria le diese la mano de esposa, porque
su alma no se perdiese, partiendo desesperado desta vida, que le movieron,
y aun forzaron, a decir que si Quiteria quería dársela, que él se
contentaba, pues todo era dilatar por un momento el cumplimiento de sus
deseos.

Luego acudieron todos a Quiteria, y unos con ruegos, y otros con lágrimas,
y otros con eficaces razones, la persuadían que diese la mano al pobre
Basilio; y ella, más dura que un mármol y más sesga que una estatua,
mostraba que ni sabía ni podía, ni quería responder palabra; ni la
respondiera si el cura no la dijera que se determinase presto en lo que
había de hacer, porque tenía Basilio ya el alma en los dientes, y no daba
lugar a esperar inresolutas determinaciones.

Entonces la hermosa Quiteria, sin responder palabra alguna, turbada, al
parecer triste y pesarosa, llegó donde Basilio estaba, ya los ojos vueltos,
el aliento corto y apresurado, murmurando entre los dientes el nombre de
Quiteria, dando muestras de morir como gentil, y no como cristiano. Llegó,
en fin, Quiteria, y, puesta de rodillas, le pidió la mano por señas, y no
por palabras. Desencajó los ojos Basilio, y, mirándola atentamente, le
dijo:

-¡Oh Quiteria, que has venido a ser piadosa a tiempo cuando tu piedad ha de
servir de cuchillo que me acabe de quitar la vida, pues ya no tengo fuerzas
para llevar la gloria que me das en escogerme por tuyo, ni para suspender
el dolor que tan apriesa me va cubriendo los ojos con la espantosa sombra
de la muerte! Lo que te suplico es, ¡oh fatal estrella mía!, que la mano
que me pides y quieres darme no sea por cumplimiento, ni para engañarme de
nuevo, sino que confieses y digas que, sin hacer fuerza a tu voluntad, me
la entregas y me la das como a tu legítimo esposo; pues no es razón que en
un trance como éste me engañes, ni uses de fingimientos con quien tantas
verdades ha tratado contigo.

Entre estas razones, se desmayaba, de modo que todos los presentes pensaban
que cada desmayo se había de llevar el alma consigo. Quiteria, toda honesta
y toda vergonzosa, asiendo con su derecha mano la de Basilio, le dijo:

-Ninguna fuerza fuera bastante a torcer mi voluntad; y así, con la más
libre que tengo te doy la mano de legítima esposa, y recibo la tuya, si es
que me la das de tu libre albedrío, sin que la turbe ni contraste la
calamidad en que tu discurso acelerado te ha puesto.

-Sí doy -respondió Basilio-, no turbado ni confuso, sino con el claro
entendimiento que el cielo quiso darme; y así, me doy y me entrego por tu
esposo.

-Y yo por tu esposa -respondió Quiteria-, ahora vivas largos años, ahora te
lleven de mis brazos a la sepultura.

-Para estar tan herido este mancebo -dijo a este punto Sancho Panza-, mucho
habla; háganle que se deje de requiebros y que atienda a su alma, que, a mi
parecer, más la tiene en la lengua que en los dientes.

Estando, pues, asidos de las manos Basilio y Quiteria, el cura, tierno y
lloroso, los echó la bendición y pidió al cielo diese buen poso al alma del
nuevo desposado; el cual, así como recibió la bendición, con presta
ligereza se levantó en pie, y con no vista desenvoltura se sacó el estoque,
a quien servía de vaina su cuerpo.

Quedaron todos los circunstantes admirados, y algunos dellos, más simples
que curiosos, en altas voces, comenzaron a decir:

-¡Milagro, milagro!

Pero Basilio replicó:

-¡No "milagro, milagro", sino industria, industria!

El cura, desatentado y atónito, acudió con ambas manos a tentar la herida,
y halló que la cuchilla había pasado, no por la carne y costillas de
Basilio, sino por un cañón hueco de hierro que, lleno de sangre, en aquel
lugar bien acomodado tenía; preparada la sangre, según después se supo, de
modo que no se helase.

Finalmente, el cura y Camacho, con todos los más circunstantes, se tuvieron
por burlados y escarnidos. La esposa no dio muestras de pesarle de la
burla; antes, oyendo decir que aquel casamiento, por haber sido engañoso,
no había de ser valedero, dijo que ella le confirmaba de nuevo; de lo cual
coligieron todos que de consentimiento y sabiduría de los dos se había
trazado aquel caso, de lo que quedó Camacho y sus valedores tan corridos
que remitieron su venganza a las manos, y, desenvainando muchas espadas,
arremetieron a Basilio, en cuyo favor en un instante se desenvainaron casi
otras tantas. Y, tomando la delantera a caballo don Quijote, con la lanza
sobre el brazo y bien cubierto de su escudo, se hacía dar lugar de todos.
Sancho, a quien jamás pluguieron ni solazaron semejantes fechurías, se
acogió a las tinajas, donde había sacado su agradable espuma, pareciéndole
aquel lugar como sagrado, que había de ser tenido en respeto. Don Quijote,
a grandes voces, decía:

-Teneos, señores, teneos, que no es razón toméis venganza de los agravios
que el amor nos hace; y advertid que el amor y la guerra son una misma
cosa, y así como en la guerra es cosa lícita y acostumbrada usar de ardides
y estratagemas para vencer al enemigo, así en las contiendas y competencias
amorosas se tienen por buenos los embustes y marañas que se hacen para
conseguir el fin que se desea, como no sean en menoscabo y deshonra de la
cosa amada. Quiteria era de Basilio, y Basilio de Quiteria, por justa y
favorable disposición de los cielos. Camacho es rico, y podrá comprar su
gusto cuando, donde y como quisiere. Basilio no tiene más desta oveja, y no
se la ha de quitar alguno, por poderoso que sea; que a los dos que Dios
junta no podrá separar el hombre; y el que lo intentare, primero ha de
pasar por la punta desta lanza.

Y, en esto, la blandió tan fuerte y tan diestramente, que puso pavor en
todos los que no le conocían, y tan intensamente se fijó en la imaginación
de Camacho el desdén de Quiteria, que se la borró de la memoria en un
instante; y así, tuvieron lugar con él las persuasiones del cura, que era
varón prudente y bien intencionado, con las cuales quedó Camacho y los de
su parcialidad pacíficos y sosegados; en señal de lo cual volvieron las
espadas a sus lugares, culpando más a la facilidad de Quiteria que a la
industria de Basilio; haciendo discurso Camacho que si Quiteria quería bien
a Basilio doncella, también le quisiera casada, y que debía de dar gracias
al cielo, más por habérsela quitado que por habérsela dado.

Consolado, pues, y pacífico Camacho y los de su mesnada, todos los de la de
Basilio se sosegaron, y el rico Camacho, por mostrar que no sentía la
burla, ni la estimaba en nada, quiso que las fiestas pasasen adelante como
si realmente se desposara; pero no quisieron asistir a ellas Basilio ni su
esposa ni secuaces; y así, se fueron a la aldea de Basilio, que también los
pobres virtuosos y discretos tienen quien los siga, honre y ampare, como
los ricos tienen quien los lisonjee y acompañe.

Llevarónse consigo a don Quijote, estimándole por hombre de valor y de pelo
en pecho. A sólo Sancho se le escureció el alma, por verse imposibilitado
de aguardar la espléndida comida y fiestas de Camacho, que duraron hasta la
noche; y así, asenderado y triste, siguió a su señor, que con la cuadrilla
de Basilio iba, y así se dejó atrás las ollas de Egipto, aunque las llevaba
en el alma, cuya ya casi consumida y acabada espuma, que en el caldero
llevaba, le representaba la gloria y la abundancia del bien que perdía; y
así, congojado y pensativo, aunque sin hambre, sin apearse del rucio,
siguió las huellas de Rocinante.





Capítulo XXII. Donde se da cuenta de la grande aventura de la cueva de
Montesinos, que está en el corazón de la Mancha, a quien dio felice cima el
valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha


Grandes fueron y muchos los regalos que los desposados hicieron a don
Quijote, obligados de las muestras que había dado defendiendo su causa, y
al par de la valentía le graduaron la discreción, teniéndole por un Cid en
las armas y por un Cicerón en la elocuencia. El buen Sancho se refociló
tres días a costa de los novios, de los cuales se supo que no fue traza
comunicada con la hermosa Quiteria el herirse fingidamente, sino industria
de Basilio, esperando della el mesmo suceso que se había visto; bien es
verdad que confesó que había dado parte de su pensamiento a algunos de sus
amigos, para que al tiempo necesario favoreciesen su intención y abonasen
su engaño.

-No se pueden ni deben llamar engaños -dijo don Quijote- los que ponen la
mira en virtuosos fines.

Y que el de casarse los enamorados era el fin de más excelencia,
advirtiendo que el mayor contrario que el amor tiene es la hambre y la
continua necesidad, porque el amor es todo alegría, regocijo y contento, y
más cuando el amante está en posesión de la cosa amada, contra quien son
enemigos opuestos y declarados la necesidad y la pobreza; y que todo esto
decía con intención de que se dejase el señor Basilio de ejercitar las
habilidades que sabe, que, aunque le daban fama, no le daban dineros, y que
atendiese a granjear hacienda por medios lícitos e industriosos, que nunca
faltan a los prudentes y aplicados.

-El pobre honrado, si es que puede ser honrado el pobre, tiene prenda en
tener mujer hermosa, que, cuando se la quitan, le quitan la honra y se la
matan. La mujer hermosa y honrada, cuyo marido es pobre, merece ser
coronada con laureles y palmas de vencimiento y triunfo. La hermosura, por
sí sola, atrae las voluntades de cuantos la miran y conocen, y como a
señuelo gustoso se le abaten las águilas reales y los pájaros altaneros;
pero si a la tal hermosura se le junta la necesidad y la estrecheza,
también la embisten los cuervos, los milanos y las otras aves de rapiña; y
la que está a tantos encuentros firme bien merece llamarse corona de su
marido. Mirad, discreto Basilio -añadió don Quijote-: opinión fue de no sé
qué sabio que no había en todo el mundo sino una sola mujer buena, y daba
por consejo que cada uno pensase y creyese que aquella sola buena era la
suya, y así viviría contento. Yo no soy casado, ni hasta agora me ha venido
en pensamiento serlo; y, con todo esto, me atrevería a dar consejo al que
me lo pidiese del modo que había de buscar la mujer con quien se quisiese
casar. Lo primero, le aconsejaría que mirase más a la fama que a la
hacienda, porque la buena mujer no alcanza la buena fama solamente con ser
buena, sino con parecerlo; que mucho más dañan a las honras de las mujeres
las desenvolturas y libertades públicas que las maldades secretas. Si traes
buena mujer a tu casa, fácil cosa sería conservarla, y aun mejorarla, en
aquella bondad; pero si la traes mala, en trabajo te pondrá el enmendarla:
que no es muy hacedero pasar de un estremo a otro. Yo no digo que sea
imposible, pero téngolo por dificultoso.

Oía todo esto Sancho, y dijo entre sí:

-Este mi amo, cuando yo hablo cosas de meollo y de sustancia suele decir
que podría yo tomar un púlpito en las manos y irme por ese mundo adelante
predicando lindezas; y yo digo dél que cuando comienza a enhilar sentencias
y a dar consejos, no sólo puede tomar púlpito en las manos, sino dos en
cada dedo, y andarse por esas plazas a ¿qué quieres boca? ¡Válate el diablo
por caballero andante, que tantas cosas sabes! Yo pensaba en mi ánima que
sólo podía saber aquello que tocaba a sus caballerías, pero no hay cosa
donde no pique y deje de meter su cucharada.

Murmuraba esto algo Sancho, y entreoyóle su señor, y preguntóle:

-¿Qué murmuras, Sancho?

-No digo nada, ni murmuro de nada -respondió Sancho-; sólo estaba diciendo
entre mí que quisiera haber oído lo que vuesa merced aquí ha dicho antes
que me casara, que quizá dijera yo agora: "El buey suelto bien se lame".

-¿Tan mala es tu Teresa, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-No es muy mala -respondió Sancho-, pero no es muy buena; a lo menos, no es
tan buena como yo quisiera.

-Mal haces, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, en decir mal de tu mujer, que, en
efecto, es madre de tus hijos.

-No nos debemos nada -respondió Sancho-, que también ella dice mal de mí
cuando se le antoja, especialmente cuando está celosa, que entonces súfrala
el mesmo Satanás.

Finalmente, tres días estuvieron con los novios, donde fueron regalados y
servidos como cuerpos de rey. Pidió don Quijote al diestro licenciado le
diese una guía que le encaminase a la cueva de Montesinos, porque tenía
gran deseo de entrar en ella y ver a ojos vistas si eran verdaderas las
maravillas que de ella se decían por todos aquellos contornos. El
licenciado le dijo que le daría a un primo suyo, famoso estudiante y muy
aficionado a leer libros de caballerías, el cual con mucha voluntad le
pondría a la boca de la mesma cueva, y le enseñaría las lagunas de Ruidera,
famosas ansimismo en toda la Mancha, y aun en toda España; y díjole que
llevaría con él gustoso entretenimiento, a causa que era mozo que sabía
hacer libros para imprimir y para dirigirlos a príncipes. Finalmente, el
primo vino con una pollina preñada, cuya albarda cubría un gayado tapete o
arpillera. Ensilló Sancho a Rocinante y aderezó al rucio, proveyó sus
alforjas, a las cuales acompañaron las del primo, asimismo bien proveídas,
y, encomendándose a Dios y despediéndose de todos, se pusieron en camino,
tomando la derrota de la famosa cueva de Montesinos.

En el camino preguntó don Quijote al primo de qué género y calidad eran sus
ejercicios, su profesión y estudios; a lo que él respondió que su
profesión era ser humanista; sus ejercicios y estudios, componer libros
para dar a la estampa, todos de gran provecho y no menos entretenimiento
para la república; que el uno se intitulaba el de las libreas, donde pinta
setecientas y tres libreas, con sus colores, motes y cifras, de donde
podían sacar y tomar las que quisiesen en tiempo de fiestas y regocijos los
caballeros cortesanos, sin andarlas mendigando de nadie, ni lambicando,
como dicen, el cerbelo, por sacarlas conformes a sus deseos e intenciones.

-Porque doy al celoso, al desdeñado, al olvidado y al ausente las que les
convienen, que les vendrán más justas que pecadoras. Otro libro tengo
también, a quien he de llamar Metamorfóseos, o Ovidio español, de invención
nueva y rara; porque en él, imitando a Ovidio a lo burlesco, pinto quién
fue la Giralda de Sevilla y el Ángel de la Madalena, quién el Caño de
Vecinguerra, de Córdoba, quiénes los Toros de Guisando, la Sierra Morena,
las fuentes de Leganitos y Lavapiés, en Madrid, no olvidándome de la del
Piojo, de la del Caño Dorado y de la Priora; y esto, con sus alegorías,
metáforas y translaciones, de modo que alegran, suspenden y enseñan a un
mismo punto. Otro libro tengo, que le llamo Suplemento a Virgilio Polidoro,
que trata de la invención de las cosas, que es de grande erudición y
estudio, a causa que las cosas que se dejó de decir Polidoro de gran
sustancia, las averiguo yo, y las declaro por gentil estilo. Olvidósele a
Virgilio de declararnos quién fue el primero que tuvo catarro en el mundo,
y el primero que tomó las unciones para curarse del morbo gálico, y yo lo
declaro al pie de la letra, y lo autorizo con más de veinte y cinco
autores: porque vea vuesa merced si he trabajado bien y si ha de ser útil
el tal libro a todo el mundo.

Sancho, que había estado muy atento a la narración del primo, le dijo:

-Dígame, señor, así Dios le dé buena manderecha en la impresión de sus
libros: ¿sabríame decir, que sí sabrá, pues todo lo sabe, quién fue el
primero que se rascó en la cabeza, que yo para mí tengo que debió de ser
nuestro padre Adán?

-Sí sería -respondió el primo-, porque Adán no hay duda sino que tuvo
cabeza y cabellos; y, siendo esto así, y siendo el primer hombre del mundo,
alguna vez se rascaría.

-Así lo creo yo -respondió Sancho-; pero dígame ahora: ¿quién fue el primer
volteador del mundo?

-En verdad, hermano -respondió el primo-, que no me sabré determinar por
ahora, hasta que lo estudie. Yo lo estudiaré, en volviendo adonde tengo mis
libros, y yo os satisfaré cuando otra vez nos veamos, que no ha de ser ésta
la postrera.

-Pues mire, señor -replicó Sancho-, no tome trabajo en esto, que ahora he
caído en la cuenta de lo que le he preguntado. Sepa que el primer volteador
del mundo fue Lucifer, cuando le echaron o arrojaron del cielo, que vino
volteando hasta los abismos.

-Tienes razón, amigo -dijo el primo.

Y dijo don Quijote:

-Esa pregunta y respuesta no es tuya, Sancho: a alguno las has oído decir.

-Calle, señor -replicó Sancho-, que a buena fe que si me doy a preguntar y
a responder, que no acabe de aquí a mañana. Sí, que para preguntar
necedades y responder disparates no he menester yo andar buscando ayuda de
vecinos.

-Más has dicho, Sancho, de lo que sabes -dijo don Quijote-; que hay algunos
que se cansan en saber y averiguar cosas que, después de sabidas y
averiguadas, no importan un ardite al entendimiento ni a la memoria.

En estas y otras gustosas pláticas se les pasó aquel día, y a la noche se
albergaron en una pequeña aldea, adonde el primo dijo a don Quijote que
desde allí a la cueva de Montesinos no había más de dos leguas, y que si
llevaba determinado de entrar en ella, era menester proverse de sogas, para
atarse y descolgarse en su profundidad.

Don Quijote dijo que, aunque llegase al abismo, había de ver dónde paraba;
y así, compraron casi cien brazas de soga, y otro día, a las dos de la
tarde, llegaron a la cueva, cuya boca es espaciosa y ancha, pero llena de
cambroneras y cabrahígos, de zarzas y malezas, tan espesas y intricadas,
que de todo en todo la ciegan y encubren. En viéndola, se apearon el primo,
Sancho y don Quijote, al cual los dos le ataron luego fortísimamente con
las sogas; y, en tanto que le fajaban y ceñían, le dijo Sancho:

-Mire vuestra merced, señor mío, lo que hace: no se quiera sepultar en
vida, ni se ponga adonde parezca frasco que le ponen a enfriar en algún
pozo. Sí, que a vuestra merced no le toca ni atañe ser el escudriñador
desta que debe de ser peor que mazmorra.

-Ata y calla -respondió don Quijote-, que tal empresa como aquésta, Sancho
amigo, para mí estaba guardada.

Y entonces dijo la guía:

-Suplico a vuesa merced, señor don Quijote, que mire bien y especule con
cien ojos lo que hay allá dentro: quizá habrá cosas que las ponga yo en el
libro de mis Transformaciones.

-En manos está el pandero que le sabrá bien tañer -respondió Sancho Panza.

Dicho esto y acabada la ligadura de don Quijote -que no fue sobre el arnés,
sino sobre el jubón de armar-, dijo don Quijote:

-Inadvertidos hemos andado en no habernos proveído de algún esquilón
pequeño, que fuera atado junto a mí en esta mesma soga, con cuyo sonido se
entendiera que todavía bajaba y estaba vivo; pero, pues ya no es posible, a
la mano de Dios, que me guíe.

Y luego se hincó de rodillas y hizo una oración en voz baja al cielo,
pidiendo a Dios le ayudase y le diese buen suceso en aquella, al parecer,
peligrosa y nueva aventura, y en voz alta dijo luego:

-¡Oh señora de mis acciones y movimientos, clarísima y sin par Dulcinea del
Toboso! Si es posible que lleguen a tus oídos las plegarias y rogaciones
deste tu venturoso amante, por tu inaudita belleza te ruego las escuches,
que no son otras que rogarte no me niegues tu favor y amparo, ahora que
tanto le he menester. Yo voy a despeñarme, a empozarme y a hundirme en el
abismo que aquí se me representa, sólo porque conozca el mundo que si tú me
favoreces, no habrá imposible a quien yo no acometa y acabe.

Y, en diciendo esto, se acercó a la sima; vio no ser posible descolgarse,
ni hacer lugar a la entrada, si no era a fuerza de brazos, o a cuchilladas,
y así, poniendo mano a la espada, comenzó a derribar y a cortar de aquellas
malezas que a la boca de la cueva estaban, por cuyo ruido y estruendo
salieron por ella una infinidad de grandísimos cuervos y grajos, tan
espesos y con tanta priesa, que dieron con don Quijote en el suelo; y si él
fuera tan agorero como católico cristiano, lo tuviera a mala señal y
escusara de encerrarse en lugar semejante.

Finalmente se levantó, y, viendo que no salían más cuervos ni otras aves
noturnas, como fueron murciélagos, que asimismo entre los cuervos salieron,
dándole soga el primo y Sancho, se dejó calar al fondo de la caverna
espantosa; y, al entrar, echándole Sancho su bendición y haciendo sobre él
mil cruces, dijo:

-¡Dios te guíe y la Peña de Francia, junto con la Trinidad de Gaeta, flor,
nata y espuma de los caballeros andantes! ¡Allá vas, valentón del mundo,
corazón de acero, brazos de bronce! ¡Dios te guíe, otra vez, y te vuelva
libre, sano y sin cautela a la luz desta vida, que dejas por enterrarte en
esta escuridad que buscas!

Casi las mismas plegarias y deprecaciones hizo el primo.

Iba don Quijote dando voces que le diesen soga y más soga, y ellos se la
daban poco a poco; y cuando las voces, que acanaladas por la cueva salían,
dejaron de oírse, ya ellos tenían descolgadas las cien brazas de soga, y
fueron de parecer de volver a subir a don Quijote, pues no le podían dar
más cuerda. Con todo eso, se detuvieron como media hora, al cabo del cual
espacio volvieron a recoger la soga con mucha facilidad y sin peso alguno,
señal que les hizo imaginar que don Quijote se quedaba dentro; y,
creyéndolo así, Sancho lloraba amargamente y tiraba con mucha priesa por
desengañarse, pero, llegando, a su parecer, a poco más de las ochenta
brazas, sintieron peso, de que en estremo se alegraron. Finalmente, a las
diez vieron distintamente a don Quijote, a quien dio voces Sancho,
diciéndole:

-Sea vuestra merced muy bien vuelto, señor mío, que ya pensábamos que se
quedaba allá para casta.

Pero no respondía palabra don Quijote; y, sacándole del todo, vieron que
traía cerrados los ojos, con muestras de estar dormido. Tendiéronle en el
suelo y desliáronle, y con todo esto no despertaba; pero tanto le volvieron
y revolvieron, sacudieron y menearon, que al cabo de un buen espacio volvió
en sí, desperezándose, bien como si de algún grave y profundo sueño
despertara; y, mirando a una y otra parte, como espantado, dijo:

-Dios os lo perdone, amigos; que me habéis quitado de la más sabrosa y
agradable vida y vista que ningún humano ha visto ni pasado. En efecto,
ahora acabo de conocer que todos los contentos desta vida pasan como sombra
y sueño, o se marchitan como la flor del campo. ¡Oh desdichado Montesinos!
¡Oh mal ferido Durandarte! ¡Oh sin ventura Belerma! ¡Oh lloroso Guadiana, y
vosotras sin dicha ijas de Ruidera, que mostráis en vuestras aguas las que
lloraron vuestros hermosos ojos!

Escuchaban el primo y Sancho las palabras de don Quijote, que las decía
como si con dolor inmenso las sacara de las entrañas. Suplicáronle les
diese a entender lo que decía, y les dijese lo que en aquel infierno había
visto.

-¿Infierno le llamáis? -dijo don Quijote-; pues no le llaméis ansí, porque
no lo merece, como luego veréis.

Pidió que le diesen algo de comer, que traía grandísima hambre. Tendieron
la arpillera del primo sobre la verde yerba, acudieron a la despensa de sus
alforjas, y, sentados todos tres en buen amor y compaña, merendaron y
cenaron, todo junto. Levantada la arpillera, dijo don Quijote de la Mancha:

-No se levante nadie, y estadme, hijos, todos atentos.





Capítulo XXIII. De las admirables cosas que el estremado don Quijote contó
que había visto en la profunda cueva de Montesinos, cuya imposibilidad y
grandeza hace que se tenga esta aventura por apócrifa


Las cuatro de la tarde serían cuando el sol, entre nubes cubierto, con luz
escasa y templados rayos, dio lugar a don Quijote para que, sin calor y
pesadumbre, contase a sus dos clarísimos oyentes lo que en la cueva de
Montesinos había visto. Y comenzó en el modo siguiente:

-A obra de doce o catorce estados de la profundidad desta mazmorra, a la
derecha mano, se hace una concavidad y espacio capaz de poder caber en ella
un gran carro con sus mulas. Éntrale una pequeña luz por unos resquicios o
agujeros, que lejos le responden, abiertos en la superficie de la tierra.
Esta concavidad y espacio vi yo a tiempo cuando ya iba cansado y mohíno de
verme, pendiente y colgado de la soga, caminar por aquella escura región
abajo, sin llevar cierto ni determinado camino; y así, determiné entrarme
en ella y descansar un poco. Di voces, pidiéndoos que no descolgásedes más
soga hasta que yo os lo dijese, pero no debistes de oírme. Fui recogiendo
la soga que enviábades, y, haciendo della una rosca o rimero, me senté
sobre él, pensativo además, considerando lo que hacer debía para calar al
fondo, no teniendo quién me sustentase; y, estando en este pensamiento y
confusión, de repente y sin procurarlo, me salteó un sueño profundísimo; y,
cuando menos lo pensaba, sin saber cómo ni cómo no, desperté dél y me hallé
en la mitad del más bello, ameno y deleitoso prado que puede criar la
naturaleza ni imaginar la más discreta imaginación humana. Despabilé los
ojos, limpiémelos, y vi que no dormía, sino que realmente estaba despierto;
con todo esto, me tenté la cabeza y los pechos, por certificarme si era yo
mismo el que allí estaba, o alguna fantasma vana y contrahecha; pero el
tacto, el sentimiento, los discursos concertados que entre mí hacía, me
certificaron que yo era allí entonces el que soy aquí ahora. Ofrecióseme
luego a la vista un real y suntuoso palacio o alcázar, cuyos muros y
paredes parecían de transparente y claro cristal fabricados; del cual
abriéndose dos grandes puertas, vi que por ellas salía y hacía mí se venía
un venerable anciano, vestido con un capuz de bayeta morada, que por el
suelo le arrastraba: ceñíale los hombros y los pechos una beca de colegial,
de raso verde; cubríale la cabeza una gorra milanesa negra, y la barba,
canísima, le pasaba de la cintura; no traía arma ninguna, sino un rosario
de cuentas en la mano, mayores que medianas nueces, y los dieces asimismo
como huevos medianos de avestruz; el continente, el paso, la gravedad y la
anchísima presencia, cada cosa de por sí y todas juntas, me suspendieron y
admiraron. Llegóse a mí, y lo primero que hizo fue abrazarme estrechamente,
y luego decirme: ''Luengos tiempos ha, valeroso caballero don Quijote de la
Mancha, que los que estamos en estas soledades encantados esperamos verte,
para que des noticia al mundo de lo que encierra y cubre la profunda cueva
por donde has entrado, llamada la cueva de Montesinos: hazaña sólo guardada
para ser acometida de tu invencible corazón y de tu ánimo stupendo. Ven
conmigo, señor clarísimo, que te quiero mostrar las maravillas que este
transparente alcázar solapa, de quien yo soy alcaide y guarda mayor
perpetua, porque soy el mismo Montesinos, de quien la cueva toma nombre''.
Apenas me dijo que era Montesinos, cuando le pregunté si fue verdad lo que
en el mundo de acá arriba se contaba: que él había sacado de la mitad del
pecho, con una pequeña daga, el corazón de su grande amigo Durandarte y
llevádole a la Señora Belerma, como él se lo mandó al punto de su muerte.
Respondióme que en todo decían verdad, sino en la daga, porque no fue daga,
ni pequeña, sino un puñal buido, más agudo que una lezna.

-Debía de ser -dijo a este punto Sancho- el tal puñal de Ramón de Hoces, el
sevillano.

-No sé -prosiguió don Quijote-, pero no sería dese puñalero, porque Ramón
de Hoces fue ayer, y lo de Roncesvalles, donde aconteció esta desgracia, ha
muchos años; y esta averiguación no es de importancia, ni turba ni altera
la verdad y contesto de la historia.

-Así es -respondió el primo-; prosiga vuestra merced, señor don Quijote,
que le escucho con el mayor gusto del mundo.

-No con menor lo cuento yo -respondió don Quijote-; y así, digo que el
venerable Montesinos me metió en el cristalino palacio, donde en una sala
baja, fresquísima sobremodo y toda de alabastro, estaba un sepulcro de
mármol, con gran maestría fabricado, sobre el cual vi a un caballero
tendido de largo a largo, no de bronce, ni de mármol, ni de jaspe hecho,
como los suele haber en otros sepulcros, sino de pura carne y de puros
huesos. Tenía la mano derecha (que, a mi parecer, es algo peluda y nervosa,
señal de tener muchas fuerzas su dueño) puesta sobre el lado del corazón,
y, antes que preguntase nada a Montesinos, viéndome suspenso mirando al del
sepulcro, me dijo: ''Éste es mi amigo Durandarte, flor y espejo de los
caballeros enamorados y valientes de su tiempo; tiénele aquí encantado,
como me tiene a mí y a otros muchos y muchas, Merlín, aquel francés
encantador que dicen que fue hijo del diablo; y lo que yo creo es que no
fue hijo del diablo, sino que supo, como dicen, un punto más que el diablo.
El cómo o para qué nos encantó nadie lo sabe, y ello dirá andando los
tiempos, que no están muy lejos, según imagino. Lo que a mí me admira es
que sé, tan cierto como ahora es de día, que Durandarte acabó los de su
vida en mis brazos, y que después de muerto le saqué el corazón con mis
propias manos; y en verdad que debía de pesar dos libras, porque, según los
naturales, el que tiene mayor corazón es dotado de mayor valentía del que
le tiene pequeño. Pues siendo esto así, y que realmente murió este
caballero, ¿cómo ahora se queja y sospira de cuando en cuando, como si
estuviese vivo?'' Esto dicho, el mísero Durandarte, dando una gran voz,
dijo:

   ''¡Oh, mi primo Montesinos!
   Lo postrero que os rogaba,
   que cuando yo fuere muerto,
   y mi ánima arrancada,
   que llevéis mi corazón
   adonde Belerma estaba,
   sacándomele del pecho,
   ya con puñal, ya con daga.''

Oyendo lo cual el venerable Montesinos, se puso de rodillas ante el
lastimado caballero, y, con lágrimas en los ojos, le dijo: ''Ya, señor
Durandarte, carísimo primo mío, ya hice lo que me mandastes en el aciago
día de nuestra pérdida: yo os saqué el corazón lo mejor que pude, sin que
os dejase una mínima parte en el pecho; yo le limpié con un pañizuelo de
puntas; yo partí con él de carrera para Francia, habiéndoos primero puesto
en el seno de la tierra, con tantas lágrimas, que fueron bastantes a
lavarme las manos y limpiarme con ellas la sangre que tenían, de haberos
andado en las entrañas; y, por más señas, primo de mi alma, en el primero
lugar que topé, saliendo de Roncesvalles, eché un poco de sal en vuestro
corazón, porque no oliese mal, y fuese, si no fresco, a lo menos amojamado,
a la presencia de la señora Belerma; la cual, con vos, y conmigo, y con
Guadiana, vuestro escudero, y con la dueña Ruidera y sus siete hijas y dos
sobrinas, y con otros muchos de vuestros conocidos y amigos, nos tiene aquí
encantados el sabio Merlín ha muchos años; y, aunque pasan de quinientos,
no se ha muerto ninguno de nosotros: solamente faltan Ruidera y sus hijas y
sobrinas, las cuales llorando, por compasión que debió de tener Merlín
dellas, las convirtió en otras tantas lagunas, que ahora, en el mundo de
los vivos y en la provincia de la Mancha, las llaman las lagunas de
Ruidera; las siete son de los reyes de España, y las dos sobrinas, de los
caballeros de una orden santísima, que llaman de San Juan. Guadiana,
vuestro escudero, plañendo asimesmo vuestra desgracia, fue convertido en un
río llamado de su mesmo nombre; el cual, cuando llegó a la superficie de la
tierra y vio el sol del otro cielo, fue tanto el pesar que sintió de ver
que os dejaba, que se sumergió en las entrañas de la tierra; pero, como no
es posible dejar de acudir a su natural corriente, de cuando en cuando sale
y se muestra donde el sol y las gentes le vean. Vanle administrando de sus
aguas las referidas lagunas, con las cuales y con otras muchas que se
llegan, entra pomposo y grande en Portugal. Pero, con todo esto, por
dondequiera que va muestra su tristeza y melancolía, y no se precia de
criar en sus aguas peces regalados y de estima, sino burdos y desabridos,
bien diferentes de los del Tajo dorado; y esto que agora os digo, ¡oh primo
mío!, os lo he dicho muchas veces; y, como no me respondéis, imagino que no
me dais crédito, o no me oís, de lo que yo recibo tanta pena cual Dios lo
sabe. Unas nuevas os quiero dar ahora, las cuales, ya que no sirvan de
alivio a vuestro dolor, no os le aumentarán en ninguna manera. Sabed que
tenéis aquí en vuestra presencia, y abrid los ojos y veréislo, aquel gran
caballero de quien tantas cosas tiene profetizadas el sabio Merlín, aquel
don Quijote de la Mancha, digo, que de nuevo y con mayores ventajas que en
los pasados siglos ha resucitado en los presentes la ya olvidada andante
caballería, por cuyo medio y favor podría ser que nosotros fuésemos
desencantados; que las grandes hazañas para los grandes hombres están
guardadas''. ''Y cuando así no sea -respondió el lastimado Durandarte con
voz desmayada y baja-, cuando así no sea, ¡oh primo!, digo, paciencia y
barajar''. Y, volviéndose de lado, tornó a su acostumbrado silencio, sin
hablar más palabra. Oyéronse en esto grandes alaridos y llantos,
acompañados de profundos gemidos y angustiados sollozos; volví la cabeza, y
vi por las paredes de cristal que por otra sala pasaba una procesión de dos
hileras de hermosísimas doncellas, todas vestidas de luto, con turbantes
blancos sobre las cabezas, al modo turquesco. Al cabo y fin de las hileras
venía una señora, que en la gravedad lo parecía, asimismo vestida de negro,
con tocas blancas tan tendidas y largas, que besaban la tierra. Su turbante
era mayor dos veces que el mayor de alguna de las otras; era cejijunta y la
nariz algo chata; la boca grande, pero colorados los labios; los dientes,
que tal vez los descubría, mostraban ser ralos y no bien puestos, aunque
eran blancos como unas peladas almendras; traía en las manos un lienzo
delgado, y entre él, a lo que pude divisar, un corazón de carne momia,
según venía seco y amojamado. Díjome Montesinos como toda aquella gente de
la procesión eran sirvientes de Durandarte y de Belerma, que allí con sus
dos señores estaban encantados, y que la última, que traía el corazón entre
el lienzo y en las manos, era la señora Belerma, la cual con sus doncellas
cuatro días en la semana hacían aquella procesión y cantaban, o, por mejor
decir, lloraban endechas sobre el cuerpo y sobre el lastimado corazón de su
primo; y que si me había parecido algo fea, o no tan hermosa como tenía la
fama, era la causa las malas noches y peores días que en aquel encantamento
pasaba, como lo podía ver en sus grandes ojeras y en su color quebradiza.
''Y no toma ocasión su amarillez y sus ojeras de estar con el mal mensil,
ordinario en las mujeres, porque ha muchos meses, y aun años, que no le
tiene ni asoma por sus puertas, sino del dolor que siente su corazón por el
que de contino tiene en las manos, que le renueva y trae a la memoria la
desgracia de su mal logrado amante; que si esto no fuera, apenas la
igualara en hermosura, donaire y brío la gran Dulcinea del Toboso, tan
celebrada en todos estos contornos, y aun en todo el mundo''. ''¡Cepos
quedos! -dije yo entonces-, señor don Montesinos: cuente vuesa merced su
historia como debe, que ya sabe que toda comparación es odiosa, y así, no
hay para qué comparar a nadie con nadie. La sin par Dulcinea del Toboso es
quien es, y la señora doña Belerma es quien es, y quien ha sido, y quédese
aquí''. A lo que él me respondió: ''Señor don Quijote, perdóneme vuesa
merced, que yo confieso que anduve mal, y no dije bien en decir que apenas
igualara la señora Dulcinea a la señora Belerma, pues me bastaba a mí haber
entendido, por no sé qué barruntos, que vuesa merced es su caballero, para
que me mordiera la lengua antes de compararla sino con el mismo cielo''.
Con esta satisfación que me dio el gran Montesinos se quietó mi corazón del
sobresalto que recebí en oír que a mi señora la comparaban con Belerma.

-Y aun me maravillo yo -dijo Sancho- de cómo vuestra merced no se subió
sobre el vejote, y le molió a coces todos los huesos, y le peló las barbas,
sin dejarle pelo en ellas.

-No, Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, no me estaba a mí bien hacer
eso, porque estamos todos obligados a tener respeto a los ancianos, aunque
no sean caballeros, y principalmente a los que lo son y están encantados;
yo sé bien que no nos quedamos a deber nada en otras muchas demandas y
respuestas que entre los dos pasamos.

A esta sazón dijo el primo:

-Yo no sé, señor don Quijote, cómo vuestra merced en tan poco espacio de
tiempo como ha que está allá bajo, haya visto tantas cosas y hablado y
respondido tanto.

-¿Cuánto ha que bajé? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Poco más de una hora -respondió Sancho.

-Eso no puede ser -replicó don Quijote-, porque allá me anocheció y
amaneció, y tornó a anochecer y amanecer tres veces; de modo que, a mi
cuenta, tres días he estado en aquellas partes remotas y escondidas a la
vista nuestra.

-Verdad debe de decir mi señor -dijo Sancho-, que, como todas las cosas que
le han sucedido son por encantamento, quizá lo que a nosotros nos parece un
hora, debe de parecer allá tres días con sus noches.

-Así será -respondió don Quijote.

-Y ¿ha comido vuestra merced en todo este tiempo, señor mío? -preguntó el
primo.

-No me he desayunado de bocado -respondió don Quijote-, ni aun he tenido
hambre, ni por pensamiento.

-Y los encantados, ¿comen? -dijo el primo.

-No comen -respondió don Quijote-, ni tienen escrementos mayores; aunque es
opinión que les crecen las uñas, las barbas y los cabellos.

-¿Y duermen, por ventura, los encantados, señor? -preguntó Sancho.

-No, por cierto -respondió don Quijote-; a lo menos, en estos tres días que
yo he estado con ellos, ninguno ha pegado el ojo, ni yo tampoco.

-Aquí encaja bien el refrán -dijo Sancho- de dime con quién andas, decirte
he quién eres: ándase vuestra merced con encantados ayunos y vigilantes,
mirad si es mucho que ni coma ni duerma mientras con ellos anduviere. Pero
perdóneme vuestra merced, señor mío, si le digo que de todo cuanto aquí ha
dicho, lléveme Dios, que iba a decir el diablo, si le creo cosa alguna.

-¿Cómo no? -dijo el primo-, pues ¿había de mentir el señor don Quijote,
que, aunque quisiera, no ha tenido lugar para componer e imaginar tanto
millón de mentiras?

-Yo no creo que mi señor miente -respondió Sancho.

-Si no, ¿qué crees? -le preguntó don Quijote.

-Creo -respondió Sancho- que aquel Merlín, o aquellos encantadores que
encantaron a toda la chusma que vuestra merced dice que ha visto y
comunicado allá bajo, le encajaron en el magín o la memoria toda esa
máquina que nos ha contado, y todo aquello que por contar le queda.

-Todo eso pudiera ser, Sancho -replicó don Quijote-, pero no es así, porque
lo que he contado lo vi por mis propios ojos y lo toqué con mis mismas
manos. Pero, ¿qué dirás cuando te diga yo ahora cómo, entre otras infinitas
cosas y maravillas que me mostró Montesinos, las cuales despacio y a sus
tiempos te las iré contando en el discurso de nuestro viaje, por no ser
todas deste lugar, me mostró tres labradoras que por aquellos amenísimos
campos iban saltando y brincando como cabras; y, apenas las hube visto,
cuando conocí ser la una la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, y las otras dos
aquellas mismas labradoras que venían con ella, que hablamos a la salida
del Toboso? Pregunté a Montesinos si las conocía, respondióme que no, pero
que él imaginaba que debían de ser algunas señoras principales encantadas,
que pocos días había que en aquellos prados habían parecido; y que no me
maravillase desto, porque allí estaban otras muchas señoras de los pasados
y presentes siglos, encantadas en diferentes y estrañas figuras, entre las
cuales conocía él a la reina Ginebra y su dueña Quintañona, escanciando el
vino a Lanzarote,

cuando de Bretaña vino.

Cuando Sancho Panza oyó decir esto a su amo, pensó perder el juicio, o
morirse de risa; que, como él sabía la verdad del fingido encanto de
Dulcinea, de quien él había sido el encantador y el levantador de tal
testimonio, acabó de conocer indubitablemente que su señor estaba fuera de
juicio y loco de todo punto; y así, le dijo:

-En mala coyuntura y en peor sazón y en aciago día bajó vuestra merced,
caro patrón mío, al otro mundo, y en mal punto se encontró con el señor
Montesinos, que tal nos le ha vuelto. Bien se estaba vuestra merced acá
arriba con su entero juicio, tal cual Dios se le había dado, hablando
sentencias y dando consejos a cada paso, y no agora, contando los mayores
disparates que pueden imaginarse.

-Como te conozco, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, no hago caso de tus
palabras.

-Ni yo tampoco de las de vuestra merced -replicó Sancho-, siquiera me
hiera, siquiera me mate por las que le he dicho, o por las que le pienso
decir si en las suyas no se corrige y enmienda. Pero dígame vuestra merced,
ahora que estamos en paz: ¿cómo o en qué conoció a la señora nuestra ama? Y
si la habló, ¿qué dijo, y qué le respondió?

-Conocíla -respondió don Quijote- en que trae los mesmos vestidos que traía
cuando tú me le mostraste. Habléla, pero no me respondió palabra; antes, me
volvió las espaldas, y se fue huyendo con tanta priesa, que no la alcanzara
una jara. Quise seguirla, y lo hiciera, si no me aconsejara Montesinos que
no me cansase en ello, porque sería en balde, y más porque se llegaba la
hora donde me convenía volver a salir de la sima. Díjome asimesmo que,
andando el tiempo, se me daría aviso cómo habían de ser desencantados él, y
Belerma y Durandarte, con todos los que allí estaban; pero lo que más pena
me dio, de las que allí vi y noté, fue que, estándome diciendo Montesinos
estas razones, se llegó a mí por un lado, sin que yo la viese venir, una de
las dos compañeras de la sin ventura Dulcinea, y, llenos los ojos de
lágrimas, con turbada y baja voz, me dijo: ''Mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso
besa a vuestra merced las manos, y suplica a vuestra merced se la haga de
hacerla saber cómo está; y que, por estar en una gran necesidad, asimismo
suplica a vuestra merced, cuan encarecidamente puede, sea servido de
prestarle sobre este faldellín que aquí traigo, de cotonía, nuevo, media
docena de reales, o los que vuestra merced tuviere, que ella da su palabra
de volvérselos con mucha brevedad''. Suspendióme y admiróme el tal recado,
y, volviéndome al señor Montesinos, le pregunté: ''¿Es posible, señor
Montesinos, que los encantados principales padecen necesidad?'' A lo que él
me respondió: ''Créame vuestra merced, señor don Quijote de la Mancha, que
ésta que llaman necesidad adondequiera se usa, y por todo se estiende, y a
todos alcanza, y aun hasta los encantados no perdona; y, pues la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso envía a pedir esos seis reales, y la prenda es buena,
según parece, no hay sino dárselos; que, sin duda, debe de estar puesta en
algún grande aprieto''. ''Prenda, no la tomaré yo -le respondí-, ni menos
le daré lo que pide, porque no tengo sino solos cuatro reales''; los cuales
le di (que fueron los que tú, Sancho, me diste el otro día para dar limosna
a los pobres que topase por los caminos), y le dije: ''Decid, amiga mía, a
vuesa señora que a mí me pesa en el alma de sus trabajos, y que quisiera
ser un Fúcar para remediarlos; y que le hago saber que yo no puedo ni debo
tener salud careciendo de su agradable vista y discreta conversación, y que
le suplico, cuan encarecidamente puedo, sea servida su merced de dejarse
ver y tratar deste su cautivo servidor y asendereado caballero. Diréisle
también que, cuando menos se lo piense, oirá decir como yo he hecho un
juramento y voto, a modo de aquel que hizo el marqués de Mantua, de vengar
a su sobrino Baldovinos, cuando le halló para espirar en mitad de la
montiña, que fue de no comer pan a manteles, con las otras zarandajas que
allí añadió, hasta vengarle; y así le haré yo de no sosegar, y de andar las
siete partidas del mundo, con más puntualidad que las anduvo el infante don
Pedro de Portugal, hasta desencantarla''. ''Todo eso, y más, debe vuestra
merced a mi señora'', me respondió la doncella. Y, tomando los cuatro
reales, en lugar de hacerme una reverencia, hizo una cabriola, que se
levantó dos varas de medir en el aire.

-¡Oh santo Dios! -dijo a este tiempo dando una gran voz Sancho-. ¿Es
posible que tal hay en el mundo, y que tengan en él tanta fuerza los
encantadores y encantamentos, que hayan trocado el buen juicio de mi señor
en una tan disparatada locura? ¡Oh señor, señor, por quien Dios es, que
vuestra merced mire por sí y vuelva por su honra, y no dé crédito a esas
vaciedades que le tienen menguado y descabalado el sentido!

-Como me quieres bien, Sancho, hablas desa manera -dijo don Quijote-; y,
como no estás experimentado en las cosas del mundo, todas las cosas que
tienen algo de dificultad te parecen imposibles; pero andará el tiempo,
como otra vez he dicho, y yo te contaré algunas de las que allá abajo he
visto, que te harán creer las que aquí he contado, cuya verdad ni admite
réplica ni disputa.





Capítulo XXIV. Donde se cuentan mil zarandajas tan impertinentes como
necesarias al verdadero entendimiento desta grande historia


Dice el que tradujo esta grande historia del original, de la que escribió
su primer autor Cide Hamete Benengeli, que, llegando al capítulo de la
aventura de la cueva de Montesinos, en el margen dél estaban escritas, de
mano del mesmo Hamete, estas mismas razones:

''No me puedo dar a entender, ni me puedo persuadir, que al valeroso don
Quijote le pasase puntualmente todo lo que en el antecedente capítulo queda
escrito: la razón es que todas las aventuras hasta aquí sucedidas han sido
contingibles y verisímiles, pero ésta desta cueva no le hallo entrada
alguna para tenerla por verdadera, por ir tan fuera de los términos
razonables. Pues pensar yo que don Quijote mintiese, siendo el más
verdadero hidalgo y el más noble caballero de sus tiempos, no es posible;
que no dijera él una mentira si le asaetearan. Por otra parte, considero
que él la contó y la dijo con todas las circunstancias dichas, y que no
pudo fabricar en tan breve espacio tan gran máquina de disparates; y si
esta aventura parece apócrifa, yo no tengo la culpa; y así, sin afirmarla
por falsa o verdadera, la escribo. Tú, letor, pues eres prudente, juzga lo
que te pareciere, que yo no debo ni puedo más; puesto que se tiene por
cierto que al tiempo de su fin y muerte dicen que se retrató della, y dijo
que él la había inventado, por parecerle que convenía y cuadraba bien con
las aventuras que había leído en sus historias''.

Y luego prosigue, diciendo:

Espantóse el primo, así del atrevimiento de Sancho Panza como de la
paciencia de su amo, y juzgó que del contento que tenía de haber visto a su
señora Dulcinea del Toboso, aunque encantada, le nacía aquella condición
blanda que entonces mostraba; porque, si así no fuera, palabras y razones
le dijo Sancho, que merecían molerle a palos; porque realmente le pareció
que había andado atrevidillo con su señor, a quien le dijo:

-Yo, señor don Quijote de la Mancha, doy por bien empleadísima la jornada
que con vuestra merced he hecho, porque en ella he granjeado cuatro cosas.
La primera, haber conocido a vuestra merced, que lo tengo a gran felicidad.
La segunda, haber sabido lo que se encierra en esta cueva de Montesinos,
con las mutaciones de Guadiana y de las lagunas de Ruidera, que me servirán
para el Ovidio español que traigo entre manos. La tercera, entender la
antigüedad de los naipes, que, por lo menos, ya se usaban en tiempo del
emperador Carlomagno, según puede colegirse de las palabras que vuesa
merced dice que dijo Durandarte, cuando, al cabo de aquel grande espacio
que estuvo hablando con él Montesinos, él despertó diciendo: ''Paciencia y
barajar''; y esta razón y modo de hablar no la pudo aprender encantado,
sino cuando no lo estaba, en Francia y en tiempo del referido emperador
Carlomagno. Y esta averiguación me viene pintiparada para el otro libro que
voy componiendo , que es Suplemento de Virgilio Polidoro, en la invención
de las antigüedades; y creo que en el suyo no se acordó de poner la de los
naipes, como la pondré yo ahora, que será de mucha importancia, y más
alegando autor tan grave y tan verdadero como es el señor Durandarte. La
cuarta es haber sabido con certidumbre el nacimiento del río Guadiana,
hasta ahora ignorado de las gentes.

-Vuestra merced tiene razón -dijo don Quijote-, pero querría yo saber, ya
que Dios le haga merced de que se le dé licencia para imprimir esos sus
libros, que lo dudo, a quién piensa dirigirlos.

-Señores y grandes hay en España a quien puedan dirigirse -dijo el primo.

-No muchos -respondió don Quijote-; y no porque no lo merezcan, sino que no
quieren admitirlos, por no obligarse a la satisfación que parece se debe al
trabajo y cortesía de sus autores. Un príncipe conozco yo que puede suplir
la falta de los demás, con tantas ventajas que, si me atreviere a decirlas,
quizá despertara la invidia en más de cuatro generosos pechos; pero quédese
esto aquí para otro tiempo más cómodo, y vamos a buscar adonde recogernos
esta noche.

-No lejos de aquí -respondió el primo- está una ermita, donde hace su
habitación un ermitaño, que dicen ha sido soldado, y está en opinión de ser
un buen cristiano, y muy discreto y caritativo además. Junto con la ermita
tiene una pequeña casa, que él ha labrado a su costa; pero, con todo,
aunque chica, es capaz de recibir huéspedes.

-¿Tiene por ventura gallinas el tal ermitaño? -preguntó Sancho.

-Pocos ermitaños están sin ellas -respondió don Quijote-, porque no son los
que agora se usan como aquellos de los desiertos de Egipto, que se vestían
de hojas de palma y comían raíces de la tierra. Y no se entienda que por
decir bien de aquéllos no lo digo de aquéstos, sino que quiero decir que al
rigor y estrecheza de entonces no llegan las penitencias de los de agora;
pero no por esto dejan de ser todos buenos; a lo menos, yo por buenos los
juzgo; y, cuando todo corra turbio, menos mal hace el hipócrita que se
finge bueno que el público pecador.

Estando en esto, vieron que hacia donde ellos estaban venía un hombre a
pie, caminando apriesa, y dando varazos a un macho que venía cargado de
lanzas y de alabardas. Cuando llegó a ellos, los saludó y pasó de largo.
Don Quijote le dijo:

-Buen hombre, deteneos, que parece que vais con más diligencia que ese
macho ha menester.

-No me puedo detener, señor -respondió el hombre-, porque las armas que
veis que aquí llevo han de servir mañana; y así, me es forzoso el no
detenerme, y a Dios. Pero si quisiéredes saber para qué las llevo, en la
venta que está más arriba de la ermita pienso alojar esta noche; y si es
que hacéis este mesmo camino, allí me hallaréis, donde os contaré
maravillas. Y a Dios otra vez.

Y de tal manera aguijó el macho, que no tuvo lugar don Quijote de
preguntarle qué maravillas eran las que pensaba decirles; y, como él era
algo curioso y siempre le fatigaban deseos de saber cosas nuevas, ordenó
que al momento se partiesen y fuesen a pasar la noche en la venta, sin
tocar en la ermita, donde quisiera el primo que se quedaran.

Hízose así, subieron a caballo, y siguieron todos tres el derecho camino de
la venta, a la cual llegaron un poco antes de anochecer. Dijo el primo a
don Quijote que llegasen a ella a beber un trago. Apenas oyó esto Sancho
Panza, cuando encaminó el rucio a la ermita, y lo mismo hicieron don
Quijote y el primo; pero la mala suerte de Sancho parece que ordenó que el
ermitaño no estuviese en casa; que así se lo dijo una sotaermitaño que en
la ermita hallaron. Pidiéronle de lo caro; respondió que su señor no lo
tenía, pero que si querían agua barata, que se la daría de muy buena gana.

-Si yo la tuviera de agua -respondió Sancho-, pozos hay en el camino,
donde la hubiera satisfecho. ¡Ah bodas de Camacho y abundancia de la casa
de don Diego, y cuántas veces os tengo de echar menos!

Con esto, dejaron la ermita y picaron hacia la venta; y a poco trecho
toparon un mancebito, que delante dellos iba caminando no con mucha priesa;
y así, le alcanzaron. Llevaba la espada sobre el hombro, y en ella puesto
un bulto o envoltorio, al parecer de sus vestidos; que, al parecer, debían
de ser los calzones o greguescos, y herreruelo, y alguna camisa, porque
traía puesta una ropilla de terciopelo con algunas vislumbres de raso, y la
camisa, de fuera; las medias eran de seda, y los zapatos cuadrados, a uso
de corte; la edad llegaría a diez y ocho o diez y nueve años; alegre de
rostro, y, al parecer, ágil de su persona. Iba cantando seguidillas, para
entretener el trabajo del camino. Cuando llegaron a él, acababa de cantar
una, que el primo tomó de memoria, que dicen que decía:

   A la guerra me lleva
   mi necesidad;
   si tuviera dineros,
   no fuera, en verdad.

El primero que le habló fue don Quijote, diciéndole:

-Muy a la ligera camina vuesa merced, señor galán. Y ¿adónde bueno?
Sepamos, si es que gusta decirlo.

A lo que el mozo respondió:

-El caminar tan a la ligera lo causa el calor y la pobreza, y el adónde voy
es a la guerra.

-¿Cómo la pobreza? -preguntó don Quijote-; que por el calor bien puede ser.

-Señor -replicó el mancebo-, yo llevo en este envoltorio unos greguescos de
terciopelo, compañeros desta ropilla; si los gasto en el camino, no me
podré honrar con ellos en la ciudad, y no tengo con qué comprar otros; y,
así por esto como por orearme, voy desta manera, hasta alcanzar unas
compañías de infantería que no están doce leguas de aquí, donde asentaré mi
plaza, y no faltarán bagajes en que caminar de allí adelante hasta el
embarcadero, que dicen ha de ser en Cartagena. Y más quiero tener por amo y
por señor al rey, y servirle en la guerra, que no a un pelón en la corte.

-Y ¿lleva vuesa merced alguna ventaja por ventura? -preguntó el primo.

-Si yo hubiera servido a algún grande de España, o algún principal
personaje -respondió el mozo-, a buen seguro que yo la llevara, que eso
tiene el servir a los buenos: que del tinelo suelen salir a ser alférez o
capitanes, o con algún buen entretenimiento; pero yo, desventurado, serví
siempre a catarriberas y a gente advenediza, de ración y quitación tan
mísera y atenuada, que en pagar el almidonar un cuello se consumía la mitad
della; y sería tenido a milagro que un paje aventurero alcanzase alguna
siquiera razonable ventura.

-Y dígame, por su vida, amigo -preguntó don Quijote-: ¿es posible que en
los años que sirvió no ha podido alcanzar alguna librea?

-Dos me han dado -respondió el paje-; pero, así como el que se sale de
alguna religión antes de profesar le quitan el hábito y le vuelven sus
vestidos, así me volvían a mí los míos mis amos, que, acabados los negocios
a que venían a la corte, se volvían a sus casas y recogían las libreas que
por sola ostentación habían dado.

-Notable espilorchería, como dice el italiano -dijo don Quijote-; pero, con
todo eso, tenga a felice ventura el haber salido de la corte con tan buena
intención como lleva; porque no hay otra cosa en la tierra más honrada ni
de más provecho que servir a Dios, primeramente, y luego, a su rey y señor
natural, especialmente en el ejercicio de las armas, por las cuales se
alcanzan, si no más riquezas, a lo menos, más honra que por las letras,
como yo tengo dicho muchas veces; que, puesto que han fundado más
mayorazgos las letras que las armas, todavía llevan un no sé qué los de las
armas a los de las letras, con un sí sé qué de esplendor que se halla en
ellos, que los aventaja a todos. Y esto que ahora le quiero decir llévelo
en la memoria, que le será de mucho provecho y alivio en sus trabajos; y es
que, aparte la imaginación de los sucesos adversos que le podrán venir, que
el peor de todos es la muerte, y como ésta sea buena, el mejor de todos es
el morir. Preguntáronle a Julio César, aquel valeroso emperador romano,
cuál era la mejor muerte; respondió que la impensada, la de repente y no
prevista; y, aunque respondió como gentil y ajeno del conocimiento del
verdadero Dios, con todo eso, dijo bien, para ahorrarse del sentimiento
humano; que, puesto caso que os maten en la primera facción y refriega, o
ya de un tiro de artillería, o volado de una mina, ¿qué importa? Todo es
morir, y acabóse la obra; y, según Terencio, más bien parece el soldado
muerto en la batalla que vivo y salvo en la huida; y tanto alcanza de fama
el buen soldado cuanto tiene de obediencia a sus capitanes y a los que
mandarle pueden. Y advertid, hijo, que al soldado mejor le está el oler a
pólvora que algalia, y que si la vejez os coge en este honroso ejercicio,
aunque sea lleno de heridas y estropeado o cojo, a lo menos no os podrá
coger sin honra, y tal, que no os la podrá menoscabar la pobreza; cuanto
más, que ya se va dando orden cómo se entretengan y remedien los soldados
viejos y estropeados, porque no es bien que se haga con ellos lo que suelen
hacer los que ahorran y dan libertad a sus negros cuando ya son viejos y no
pueden servir, y, echándolos de casa con título de libres, los hacen
esclavos de la hambre, de quien no piensan ahorrarse sino con la muerte. Y
por ahora no os quiero decir más, sino que subáis a las ancas deste mi
caballo hasta la venta, y allí cenaréis conmigo, y por la mañana seguiréis
el camino, que os le dé Dios tan bueno como vuestros deseos merecen.

El paje no aceptó el convite de las ancas, aunque sí el de cenar con él en
la venta; y, a esta sazón, dicen que dijo Sancho entre sí:

-¡Válate Dios por señor! Y ¿es posible que hombre que sabe decir tales,
tantas y tan buenas cosas como aquí ha dicho, diga que ha visto los
disparates imposibles que cuenta de la cueva de Montesinos? Ahora bien,
ello dirá.

Y en esto, llegaron a la venta, a tiempo que anochecía, y no sin gusto de
Sancho, por ver que su señor la juzgó por verdadera venta, y no por
castillo, como solía. No hubieron bien entrado, cuando don Quijote preguntó
al ventero por el hombre de las lanzas y alabardas; el cual le respondió
que en la caballeriza estaba acomodando el macho. Lo mismo hicieron de sus
jumentos el primo y Sancho, dando a Rocinante el mejor pesebre y el mejor
lugar de la caballeriza.





Capítulo XXV. Donde se apunta la aventura del rebuzno y la graciosa del
titerero, con las memorables adivinanzas del mono adivino


No se le cocía el pan a don Quijote, como suele decirse, hasta oír y saber
las maravillas prometidas del hombre condutor de las armas. Fuele a buscar
donde el ventero le había dicho que estaba, y hallóle, y díjole que en todo
caso le dijese luego lo que le había de decir después, acerca de lo que le
había preguntado en el camino. El hombre le respondió:

-Más despacio, y no en pie, se ha de tomar el cuento de mis maravillas:
déjeme vuestra merced, señor bueno, acabar de dar recado a mi bestia, que
yo le diré cosas que le admiren.

-No quede por eso -respondió don Quijote-, que yo os ayudaré a todo.

Y así lo hizo, ahechándole la cebada y limpiando el pesebre, humildad que
obligó al hombre a contarle con buena voluntad lo que le pedía; y,
sentándose en un poyo y don Quijote junto a él, teniendo por senado y
auditorio al primo, al paje, a Sancho Panza y al ventero, comenzó a decir
desta manera:

-«Sabrán vuesas mercedes que en un lugar que está cuatro leguas y media
desta venta sucedió que a un regidor dél, por industria y engaño de una
muchacha criada suya, y esto es largo de contar, le faltó un asno, y,
aunque el tal regidor hizo las diligencias posibles por hallarle, no fue
posible. Quince días serían pasados, según es pública voz y fama,- que el
asno faltaba, cuando, estando en la plaza el regidor perdidoso, otro
regidor del mismo pueblo le dijo: ''Dadme albricias, compadre, que vuestro
jumento ha parecido''. ''Yo os las mando y buenas, compadre -respondió el
otro-, pero sepamos dónde ha parecido''. ''En el monte -respondió el
hallador-, le vi esta mañana, sin albarda y sin aparejo alguno, y tan flaco
que era una compasión miralle. Quísele antecoger delante de mí y traérosle,
pero está ya tan montaraz y tan huraño, que, cuando llegé a él, se fue
huyendo y se entró en lo más escondido del monte. Si queréis que volvamos
los dos a buscarle, dejadme poner esta borrica en mi casa, que luego
vuelvo''. ''Mucho placer me haréis -dijo el del jumento-, e yo procuraré
pagároslo en la mesma moneda''. Con estas circunstancias todas, y de la
mesma manera que yo lo voy contando, lo cuentan todos aquellos que están
enterados en la verdad deste caso. En resolución, los dos regidores, a pie
y mano a mano, se fueron al monte, y, llegando al lugar y sitio donde
pensaron hallar el asno, no le hallaron, ni pareció por todos aquellos
contornos, aunque más le buscaron. Viendo, pues, que no parecía, dijo el
regidor que le había visto al otro: ''Mirad, compadre: una traza me ha
venido al pensamiento, con la cual sin duda alguna podremos descubrir este
animal, aunque esté metido en las entrañas de la tierra, no que del monte;
y es que yo sé rebuznar maravillosamente; y si vos sabéis algún tanto, dad
el hecho por concluido''. ''¿Algún tanto decís, compadre? -dijo el otro-;
por Dios, que no dé la ventaja a nadie, ni aun a los mesmos asnos''.
''Ahora lo veremos -respondió el regidor segundo-, porque tengo determinado
que os vais vos por una parte del monte y yo por otra, de modo que le
rodeemos y andemos todo, y de trecho en trecho rebuznaréis vos y rebuznaré
yo, y no podrá ser menos sino que el asno nos oya y nos responda, si es que
está en el monte''. A lo que respondió el dueño del jumento: ''Digo,
compadre, que la traza es excelente y digna de vuestro gran ingenio''. Y,
dividiéndose los dos según el acuerdo, sucedió que casi a un mesmo tiempo
rebuznaron, y cada uno engañado del rebuzno del otro, acudieron a buscarse,
pensando que ya el jumento había parecido; y, en viéndose, dijo el
perdidoso: ''¿Es posible, compadre, que no fue mi asno el que rebuznó?''
''No fue, sino yo'', respondió el otro. ''Ahora digo -dijo el dueño-, que
de vos a un asno, compadre, no hay alguna diferencia, en cuanto toca al
rebuznar, porque en mi vida he visto ni oído cosa más propia''. ''Esas
alabanzas y encarecimiento -respondió el de la traza-, mejor os atañen y
tocan a vos que a mí, compadre; que por el Dios que me crió que podéis dar
dos rebuznos de ventaja al mayor y más perito rebuznador del mundo; porque
el sonido que tenéis es alto; lo sostenido de la voz, a su tiempo y compás;
los dejos, muchos y apresurados, y, en resolución, yo me doy por vencido y
os rindo la palma y doy la bandera desta rara habilidad''. ''Ahora digo
-respondió el dueño-, que me tendré y estimaré en más de aquí adelante, y
pensaré que sé alguna cosa, pues tengo alguna gracia; que, puesto que
pensara que rebuznaba bien, nunca entendí que llegaba el estremo que
decís''. ''También diré yo ahora -respondió el segundo- que hay raras
habilidades perdidas en el mundo, y que son mal empleadas en aquellos que
no saben aprovecharse dellas''. ''Las nuestras -respondió el dueño-, si no
es en casos semejantes como el que traemos entre manos, no nos pueden
servir en otros, y aun en éste plega a Dios que nos sean de provecho''.
Esto dicho, se tornaron a dividir y a volver a sus rebuznos, y a cada paso
se engañaban y volvían a juntarse, hasta que se dieron por contraseño que,
para entender que eran ellos, y no el asno, rebuznasen dos veces, una tras
otra. Con esto, doblando a cada paso los rebuznos, rodearon todo el monte
sin que el perdido jumento respondiese, ni aun por señas. Mas, ¿cómo había
de responder el pobre y mal logrado, si le hallaron en lo más escondido del
bosque, comido de lobos? Y, en viéndole, dijo su dueño: ''Ya me maravillaba
yo de que él no respondía, pues a no estar muerto, él rebuznara si nos
oyera, o no fuera asno; pero, a trueco de haberos oído rebuznar con tanta
gracia, compadre, doy por bien empleado el trabajo que he tenido en
buscarle, aunque le he hallado muerto''. ''En buena mano está, compadre
-respondió el otro-, pues si bien canta el abad, no le va en zaga el
monacillo''. Con esto, desconsolados y roncos, se volvieron a su aldea,
adonde contaron a sus amigos, vecinos y conocidos cuanto les había
acontecido en la busca del asno, exagerando el uno la gracia del otro en el
rebuznar; todo lo cual se supo y se estendió por los lugares circunvecinos.
Y el diablo, que no duerme, como es amigo de sembrar y derramar rencillas y
discordia por doquiera, levantando caramillos en el viento y grandes
quimeras de nonada, ordenó e hizo que las gentes de los otros pueblos, en
viendo a alguno de nuestra aldea, rebuznase, como dándoles en rostro con el
rebuzno de nuestros regidores. Dieron en ello los muchachos, que fue dar en
manos y en bocas de todos los demonios del infierno, y fue cundiendo el
rebuzno de en uno en otro pueblo, de manera que son conocidos los naturales
del pueblo del rebuzno, como son conocidos y diferenciados los negros de
los blancos; y ha llegado a tanto la desgracia desta burla, que muchas
veces con mano armada y formado escuadrón han salido contra los burladores
los burlados a darse la batalla, sin poderlo remediar rey ni roque, ni
temor ni vergüenza. Yo creo que mañana o esotro día han de salir en campaña
los de mi pueblo, que son los del rebuzno, contra otro lugar que está a dos
leguas del nuestro, que es uno de los que más nos persiguen: y, por salir
bien apercebidos, llevo compradas estas lanzas y alabardas que habéis
visto.» Y éstas son las maravillas que dije que os había de contar, y si no
os lo han parecido, no sé otras.

Y con esto dio fin a su plática el buen hombre; y, en esto, entró por la
puerta de la venta un hombre todo vestido de camuza, medias, greguescos y
jubón, y con voz levantada dijo:

-Señor huésped, ¿hay posada? Que viene aquí el mono adivino y el retablo de
la libertad de Melisendra.

-¡Cuerpo de tal -dijo el ventero-, que aquí está el señor mase Pedro! Buena
noche se nos apareja.

Olvidábaseme de decir como el tal mase Pedro traía cubierto el ojo
izquierdo, y casi medio carrillo, con un parche de tafetán verde, señal que
todo aquel lado debía de estar enfermo; y el ventero prosiguió, diciendo:

-Sea bien venido vuestra merced, señor mase Pedro. ¿Adónde está el mono y
el retablo, que no los veo?

-Ya llegan cerca -respondió el todo camuza-, sino que yo me he adelantado,
a saber si hay posada.

-Al mismo duque de Alba se la quitara para dársela al señor mase Pedro
-respondió el ventero-; llegue el mono y el retablo, que gente hay esta
noche en la venta que pagará el verle y las habilidades del mono.

-Sea en buen hora -respondió el del parche-, que yo moderaré el precio, y
con sola la costa me daré por bien pagado; y yo vuelvo a hacer que camine
la carreta donde viene el mono y el retablo.

Y luego se volvió a salir de la venta.

Preguntó luego don Quijote al ventero qué mase Pedro era aquél, y qué
retablo y qué mono traía. A lo que respondió el ventero:

-Éste es un famoso titerero, que ha muchos días que anda por esta Mancha de
Aragón enseñando un retablo de Melisendra, libertada por el famoso don
Gaiferos, que es una de las mejores y más bien representadas historias que
de muchos años a esta parte en este reino se han visto. Trae asimismo
consigo un mono de la más rara habilidad que se vio entre monos, ni se
imaginó entre hombres, porque si le preguntan algo, está atento a lo que le
preguntan y luego salta sobre los hombros de su amo, y, llegándosele al
oído, le dice la respuesta de lo que le preguntan, y maese Pedro la declara
luego; y de las cosas pasadas dice mucho más que de las que están por
venir; y, aunque no todas veces acierta en todas, en las más no yerra, de
modo que nos hace creer que tiene el diablo en el cuerpo. Dos reales lleva
por cada pregunta, si es que el mono responde; quiero decir, si responde el
amo por él, después de haberle hablado al oído; y así, se cree que el tal
maese Pedro esta riquísimo; y es hombre galante, como dicen en Italia y bon
compaño, y dase la mejor vida del mundo; habla más que seis y bebe más que
doce, todo a costa de su lengua y de su mono y de su retablo.

En esto, volvió maese Pedro, y en una carreta venía el retablo, y el mono,
grande y sin cola, con las posaderas de fieltro, pero no de mala cara; y,
apenas le vio don Quijote, cuando le preguntó:

-Dígame vuestra merced, señor adivino: ¿qué peje pillamo? ¿Qué ha de ser de
nosotros?. Y vea aquí mis dos reales.

Y mandó a Sancho que se los diese a maese Pedro, el cual respondió por el
mono, y dijo:

-Señor, este animal no responde ni da noticia de las cosas que están por
venir; de las pasadas sabe algo, y de las presentes, algún tanto.

-¡Voto a Rus -dijo Sancho-, no dé yo un ardite porque me digan lo que por
mí ha pasado!; porque, ¿quién lo puede saber mejor que yo mesmo? Y pagar yo
porque me digan lo que sé, sería una gran necedad; pero, pues sabe las
cosas presentes, he aquí mis dos reales, y dígame el señor monísimo qué
hace ahora mi mujer Teresa Panza, y en qué se entretiene.

No quiso tomar maese Pedro el dinero, diciendo:

-No quiero recebir adelantados los premios, sin que hayan precedido los
servicios.

Y, dando con la mano derecha dos golpes sobre el hombro izquierdo, en un
brinco se le puso el mono en él, y, llegando la boca al oído, daba diente
con diente muy apriesa; y, habiendo hecho este ademán por espacio de un
credo, de otro brinco se puso en el suelo, y al punto, con grandísima
priesa, se fue maese Pedro a poner de rodillas ante don Quijote, y,
abrazándole las piernas, dijo:

-Estas piernas abrazo, bien así como si abrazara las dos colunas de
Hércules, ¡oh resucitador insigne de la ya puesta en olvido andante
caballería!; ¡oh no jamás como se debe alabado caballero don Quijote de la
Mancha, ánimo de los desmayados, arrimo de los que van a caer, brazo de los
caídos, báculo y consuelo de todos los desdichados!

Quedó pasmado don Quijote, absorto Sancho, suspenso el primo, atónito el
paje, abobado el del rebuzno, confuso el ventero, y, finalmente, espantados
todos los que oyeron las razones del titerero, el cual prosiguió diciendo:

-Y tú, ¡oh buen Sancho Panza!, el mejor escudero y del mejor caballero del
mundo, alégrate, que tu buena mujer Teresa está buena, y ésta es la hora en
que ella está rastrillando una libra de lino, y, por más señas, tiene a su
lado izquierdo un jarro desbocado que cabe un buen porqué de vino, con que
se entretiene en su trabajo.

-Eso creo yo muy bien -respondió Sancho-, porque es ella una
bienaventurada, y, a no ser celosa, no la trocara yo por la giganta
Andandona, que, según mi señor, fue una mujer muy cabal y muy de pro; y es
mi Teresa de aquellas que no se dejan mal pasar, aunque sea a costa de sus
herederos.

-Ahora digo -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, que el que lee mucho y anda
mucho, vee mucho y sabe mucho. Digo esto porque, ¿qué persuasión fuera
bastante para persuadirme que hay monos en el mundo que adivinen, como lo
he visto ahora por mis propios ojos? Porque yo soy el mesmo don Quijote de
la Mancha que este buen animal ha dicho, puesto que se ha estendido algún
tanto en mis alabanzas; pero comoquiera que yo me sea, doy gracias al
cielo, que me dotó de un ánimo blando y compasivo, inclinado siempre a
hacer bien a todos, y mal a ninguno.

-Si yo tuviera dineros -dijo el paje-, preguntara al señor mono qué me ha
de suceder en la peregrinación que llevo.

A lo que respondió maese Pedro, que ya se había levantado de los pies de
don Quijote:

-Ya he dicho que esta bestezuela no responde a lo por venir; que si
respondiera, no importara no haber dineros; que, por servicio del señor don
Quijote, que está presente, dejara yo todos los intereses del mundo. Y
agora, porque se lo debo, y por darle gusto, quiero armar mi retablo y dar
placer a cuantos están en la venta, sin paga alguna.

Oyendo lo cual el ventero, alegre sobremanera, señaló el lugar donde se
podía poner el retablo, que en un punto fue hecho.

Don Quijote no estaba muy contento con las adivinanzas del mono, por
parecerle no ser a propósito que un mono adivinase, ni las de por venir, ni
las pasadas cosas; y así, en tanto que maese Pedro acomodaba el retablo, se
retiró don Quijote con Sancho a un rincón de la caballeriza, donde, sin ser
oídos de nadie, le dijo:

-Mira, Sancho, yo he considerado bien la estraña habilidad deste mono, y
hallo por mi cuenta que sin duda este maese Pedro, su amo, debe de tener
hecho pacto, tácito o espreso, con el demonio.

-Si el patio es espeso y del demonio -dijo Sancho-, sin duda debe de ser
muy sucio patio; pero, ¿de qué provecho le es al tal maese Pedro tener esos
patios?

-No me entiendes, Sancho: no quiero decir sino que debe de tener hecho
algún concierto con el demonio de que infunda esa habilidad en el mono, con
que gane de comer, y después que esté rico le dará su alma, que es lo que
este universal enemigo pretende. Y háceme creer esto el ver que el mono no
responde sino a las cosas pasadas o presentes, y la sabiduría del diablo no
se puede estender a más, que las por venir no las sabe si no es por
conjeturas, y no todas veces; que a solo Dios está reservado conocer los
tiempos y los momentos, y para Él no hay pasado ni porvenir, que todo es
presente. Y, siendo esto así, como lo es, está claro que este mono habla
con el estilo del diablo; y estoy maravillado cómo no le han acusado al
Santo Oficio, y examinádole y sacádole de cuajo en virtud de quién adivina;
porque cierto está que este mono no es astrólogo, ni su amo ni él alzan, ni
saben alzar, estas figuras que llaman judiciarias, que tanto ahora se usan
en España, que no hay mujercilla, ni paje, ni zapatero de viejo que no
presuma de alzar una figura, como si fuera una sota de naipes del suelo,
echando a perder con sus mentiras e ignorancias la verdad maravillosa de la
ciencia. De una señora sé yo que preguntó a uno destos figureros que si una
perrilla de falda pequeña, que tenía, si se empreñaría y pariría, y cuántos
y de qué color serían los perros que pariese. A lo que el señor judiciario,
después de haber alzado la figura, respondió que la perrica se empreñaría,
y pariría tres perricos, el uno verde, el otro encarnado y el otro de
mezcla, con tal condición que la tal perra se cubriese entre las once y
doce del día, o de la noche, y que fuese en lunes o en sábado; y lo que
sucedió fue que de allí a dos días se moría la perra de ahíta, y el señor
levantador quedó acreditado en el lugar por acertadísimo judiciario, como
lo quedan todos o los más levantadores.

-Con todo eso, querría -dijo Sancho- que vuestra merced dijese a maese
Pedro preguntase a su mono si es verdad lo que a vuestra merced le pasó en
la cueva de Montesinos; que yo para mí tengo, con perdón de vuestra merced,
que todo fue embeleco y mentira, o por lo menos, cosas soñadas.

-Todo podría ser -respondió don Quijote-, pero yo haré lo que me aconsejas,
puesto que me ha de quedar un no sé qué de escrúpulo.

Estando en esto, llegó maese Pedro a buscar a don Quijote y decirle que ya
estaba en orden el retablo; que su merced viniese a verle, porque lo
merecía. Don Quijote le comunicó su pensamiento, y le rogó preguntase luego
a su mono le dijese si ciertas cosas que había pasado en la cueva de
Montesinos habían sido soñadas o verdaderas; porque a él le parecía que
tenían de todo. A lo que maese Pedro, sin responder palabra, volvió a traer
el mono, y, puesto delante de don Quijote y de Sancho, dijo:

-Mirad, señor mono, que este caballero quiere saber si ciertas cosas que le
pasaron en una cueva llamada de Montesinos, si fueron falsas o verdaderas.

Y, haciéndole la acostumbrada señal, el mono se le subió en el hombro
izquierdo, y, hablándole, al parecer, en el oído, dijo luego maese Pedro:

-El mono dice que parte de las cosas que vuesa merced vio, o pasó, en la
dicha cueva son falsas, y parte verisímiles; y que esto es lo que sabe, y
no otra cosa, en cuanto a esta pregunta; y que si vuesa merced quisiere
saber más, que el viernes venidero responderá a todo lo que se le
preguntare, que por ahora se le ha acabado la virtud, que no le vendrá
hasta el viernes, como dicho tiene.

-¿No lo decía yo -dijo Sancho-, que no se me podía asentar que todo lo que
vuesa merced, señor mío, ha dicho de los acontecimientos de la cueva era
verdad, ni aun la mitad?

-Los sucesos lo dirán, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-; que el tiempo,
descubridor de todas las cosas, no se deja ninguna que no las saque a la
luz del sol, aunque esté escondida en los senos de la tierra. Y, por hora,
baste esto, y vámonos a ver el retablo del buen maese Pedro, que para mí
tengo que debe de tener alguna novedad.

-¿Cómo alguna? -respondió maese Pedro-: sesenta mil encierra en sí este mi
retablo; dígole a vuesa merced, mi señor don Quijote, que es una de las
cosas más de ver que hoy tiene el mundo, y operibus credite, et non verbis;
y manos a labor, que se hace tarde y tenemos mucho que hacer y que decir y
que mostrar.

Obedeciéronle don Quijote y Sancho, y vinieron donde ya estaba el retablo
puesto y descubierto, lleno por todas partes de candelillas de cera
encendidas, que le hacían vistoso y resplandeciente. En llegando, se metió
maese Pedro dentro dél, que era el que había de manejar las figuras del
artificio, y fuera se puso un muchacho, criado del maese Pedro, para servir
de intérprete y declarador de los misterios del tal retablo: tenía una
varilla en la mano, con que señalaba las figuras que salían.

Puestos, pues, todos cuantos había en la venta, y algunos en pie, frontero
del retablo, y acomodados don Quijote, Sancho, el paje y el primo en los
mejores lugares, el trujamán comenzó a decir lo que oirá y verá el que le
oyere o viere el capítulo siguiente.





Capítulo XXVI. Donde se prosigue la graciosa aventura del titerero, con
otras cosas en verdad harto buenas


Callaron todos, tirios y troyanos; quiero decir, pendientes estaban todos
los que el retablo miraban de la boca del declarador de sus maravillas,
cuando se oyeron sonar en el retablo cantidad de atabales y trompetas, y
dispararse mucha artillería, cuyo rumor pasó en tiempo breve, y luego alzó
la voz el muchacho, y dijo:

-Esta verdadera historia que aquí a vuesas mercedes se representa es sacada
al pie de la letra de las corónicas francesas y de los romances españoles
que andan en boca de las gentes, y de los muchachos, por esas calles. Trata
de la libertad que dio el señor don Gaiferos a su esposa Melisendra, que
estaba cautiva en España, en poder de moros, en la ciudad de Sansueña, que
así se llamaba entonces la que hoy se llama Zaragoza; y vean vuesas
mercedes allí cómo está jugando a las tablas don Gaiferos, según aquello
que se canta:

   Jugando está a las tablas don Gaiferos,
   que ya de Melisendra está olvidado.

Y aquel personaje que allí asoma, con corona en la cabeza y ceptro en las
manos, es el emperador Carlomagno, padre putativo de la tal Melisendra, el
cual, mohíno de ver el ocio y descuido de su yerno, le sale a reñir; y
adviertan con la vehemencia y ahínco que le riñe, que no parece sino que le
quiere dar con el ceptro media docena de coscorrones, y aun hay autores que
dicen que se los dio, y muy bien dados; y, después de haberle dicho muchas
cosas acerca del peligro que corría su honra en no procurar la libertad de
su esposa, dicen que le dijo:

"Harto os he dicho: miradlo".

Miren vuestras mercedes también cómo el emperador vuelve las espaldas y
deja despechado a don Gaiferos, el cual ya ven como arroja, impaciente de
la cólera, lejos de sí el tablero y las tablas, y pide apriesa las armas, y
a don Roldán, su primo, pide prestada su espada Durindana, y cómo don
Roldán no se la quiere prestar, ofreciéndole su compañía en la difícil
empresa en que se pone; pero el valeroso enojado no lo quiere aceptar;
antes, dice que él solo es bastante para sacar a su esposa, si bien
estuviese metida en el más hondo centro de la tierra; y, con esto, se entra
a armar, para ponerse luego en camino. Vuelvan vuestras mercedes los ojos a
aquella torre que allí parece, que se presupone que es una de las torres
del alcázar de Zaragoza, que ahora llaman la Aljafería; y aquella dama que
en aquel balcón parece, vestida a lo moro, es la sin par Melisendra, que
desde allí muchas veces se ponía a mirar el camino de Francia, y, puesta la
imaginación en París y en su esposo, se consolaba en su cautiverio. Miren
también un nuevo caso que ahora sucede, quizá no visto jamás. ¿No veen
aquel moro que callandico y pasito a paso, puesto el dedo en la boca, se
llega por las espaldas de Melisendra? Pues miren cómo la da un beso en
mitad de los labios, y la priesa que ella se da a escupir, y a limpiárselos
con la blanca manga de su camisa, y cómo se lamenta, y se arranca de pesar
sus hermosos cabellos, como si ellos tuvieran la culpa del maleficio. Miren
también cómo aquel grave moro que está en aquellos corredores es el rey
Marsilio de Sansueña; el cual, por haber visto la insolencia del moro,
puesto que era un pariente y gran privado suyo, le mandó luego prender, y
que le den docientos azotes, llevándole por las calles acostumbradas de la
ciudad,

   con chilladores delante
   y envaramiento detrás;

y veis aquí donde salen a ejecutar la sentencia, aun bien apenas no
habiendo sido puesta en ejecución la culpa; porque entre moros no hay
"traslado a la parte", ni "a prueba y estése", como entre nosotros.

-Niño, niño -dijo con voz alta a esta sazón don Quijote-, seguid vuestra
historia línea recta, y no os metáis en las curvas o transversales; que,
para sacar una verdad en limpio, menester son muchas pruebas y repruebas.

También dijo maese Pedro desde dentro:

-Muchacho, no te metas en dibujos, sino haz lo que ese señor te manda, que
será lo más acertado; sigue tu canto llano, y no te metas en contrapuntos,
que se suelen quebrar de sotiles.

-Yo lo haré así -respondió el muchacho; y prosiguió, diciendo-: Esta figura
que aquí parece a caballo, cubierta con una capa gascona, es la mesma de
don Gaiferos, a quien su esposa, ya vengada del atrevimiento del enamorado
moro, con mejor y más sosegado semblante, se ha puesto a los miradores de
la torre, y habla con su esposo, creyendo que es algún pasajero, con quien
pasó todas aquellas razones y coloquios de aquel romance que dicen:

   Caballero, si a Francia ides,
   por Gaiferos preguntad;

las cuales no digo yo ahora, porque de la prolijidad se suele engendrar el
fastidio; basta ver cómo don Gaiferos se descubre, y que por los ademanes
alegres que Melisendra hace se nos da a entender que ella le ha conocido, y
más ahora que veemos se descuelga del balcón, para ponerse en las ancas del
caballo de su buen esposo. Mas, ¡ay, sin ventura!, que se le ha asido una
punta del faldellín de uno de los hierros del balcón, y está pendiente en
el aire, sin poder llegar al suelo. Pero veis cómo el piadoso cielo socorre
en las mayores necesidades, pues llega don Gaiferos, y, sin mirar si se
rasgará o no el rico faldellín, ase della, y mal su grado la hace bajar al
suelo, y luego, de un brinco, la pone sobre las ancas de su caballo, a
horcajadas como hombre, y la manda que se tenga fuertemente y le eche los
brazos por las espaldas, de modo que los cruce en el pecho, porque no se
caiga, a causa que no estaba la señora Melisendra acostumbrada a semejantes
caballerías. Veis también cómo los relinchos del caballo dan señales que va
contento con la valiente y hermosa carga que lleva en su señor y en su
señora. Veis cómo vuelven las espaldas y salen de la ciudad, y alegres y
regocijados toman de París la vía. ¡Vais en paz, oh par sin par de
verdaderos amantes! ¡Lleguéis a salvamento a vuestra deseada patria, sin
que la fortuna ponga estorbo en vuestro felice viaje! ¡Los ojos de vuestros
amigos y parientes os vean gozar en paz tranquila los días, que los de
Néstor sean, que os quedan de la vida!

Aquí alzó otra vez la voz maese Pedro, y dijo:

-Llaneza, muchacho; no te encumbres, que toda afectación es mala.

No respondió nada el intérprete; antes, prosiguió, diciendo:

-No faltaron algunos ociosos ojos, que lo suelen ver todo, que no viesen la
bajada y la subida de Melisendra, de quien dieron noticia al rey Marsilio,
el cual mandó luego tocar al arma; y miren con qué priesa, que ya la ciudad
se hunde con el son de las campanas que en todas las torres de las
mezquitas suenan.

-¡Eso no! -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-: en esto de las campanas anda muy
impropio maese Pedro, porque entre moros no se usan campanas, sino
atabales, y un género de dulzainas que parecen nuestras chirimías; y esto
de sonar campanas en Sansueña sin duda que es un gran disparate.

Lo cual oído por maese Pedro, cesó el tocar y dijo:

-No mire vuesa merced en niñerías, señor don Quijote, ni quiera llevar las
cosas tan por el cabo que no se le halle. ¿No se representan por ahí, casi
de ordinario, mil comedias llenas de mil impropiedades y disparates, y, con
todo eso, corren felicísimamente su carrera, y se escuchan no sólo con
aplauso, sino con admiración y todo? Prosigue, muchacho, y deja decir; que,
como yo llene mi talego, si quiere represente más impropiedades que tiene
átomos el sol.

-Así es la verdad -replicó don Quijote.

Y el muchacho dijo:

-Miren cuánta y cuán lucida caballería sale de la ciudad en siguimiento de
los dos católicos amantes, cuántas trompetas que suenan, cuántas dulzainas
que tocan y cuántos atabales y atambores que retumban. Témome que los han
de alcanzar, y los han de volver atados a la cola de su mismo caballo, que
sería un horrendo espetáculo.

Viendo y oyendo, pues, tanta morisma y tanto estruendo don Quijote,
parecióle ser bien dar ayuda a los que huían; y, levantándose en pie, en
voz alta, dijo:

-No consentiré yo en mis días y en mi presencia se le haga superchería a
tan famoso caballero y a tan atrevido enamorado como don Gaiferos.
¡Deteneos, mal nacida canalla; no le sigáis ni persigáis; si no, conmigo
sois en la batalla!

Y, diciendo y haciendo, desenvainó la espada, y de un brinco se puso junto
al retablo, y, con acelerada y nunca vista furia, comenzó a llover
cuchilladas sobre la titerera morisma, derribando a unos, descabezando a
otros, estropeando a éste, destrozando a aquél, y, entre otros muchos, tiró
un altibajo tal, que si maese Pedro no se abaja, se encoge y agazapa, le
cercenara la cabeza con más facilidad que si fuera hecha de masa de
mazapán. Daba voces maese Pedro, diciendo:

-Deténgase vuesa merced, señor don Quijote, y advierta que estos que
derriba, destroza y mata no son verdaderos moros, sino unas figurillas de
pasta. ¡Mire, pecador de mí, que me destruye y echa a perder toda mi
hacienda!

Mas no por esto dejaba de menudear don Quijote cuchilladas, mandobles,
tajos y reveses como llovidos. Finalmente, en menos de dos credos dio con
todo el retablo en el suelo, hechas pedazos y desmenuzadas todas sus
jarcias y figuras: el rey Marsilio, mal herido, y el emperador Carlomagno,
partida la corona y la cabeza en dos partes. Alborotóse el senado de los
oyentes, huyóse el mono por los tejados de la ventana, temió el primo,
acobardóse el paje, y hasta el mesmo Sancho Panza tuvo pavor grandísimo,
porque, como él juró después de pasada la borrasca, jamás había visto a su
señor con tan desatinada cólera. Hecho, pues, el general destrozo del
retablo, sosegóse un poco don Quijote y dijo:

-Quisiera yo tener aquí delante en este punto todos aquellos que no creen,
ni quieren creer, de cuánto provecho sean en el mundo los caballeros
andantes: miren, si no me hallara yo aquí presente, qué fuera del buen don
Gaiferos y de la hermosa Melisendra; a buen seguro que ésta fuera ya la
hora que los hubieran alcanzado estos canes, y les hubieran hecho algún
desaguisado. En resolución, ¡viva la andante caballería sobre cuantas cosas
hoy viven en la tierra!

-¡Vivan en hora buena -dijo a esta sazón con voz enfermiza maese Pedro-, y
muera yo, pues soy tan desdichado que puedo decir con el rey don Rodrigo:

   Ayer fui señor de España...
   y hoy no tengo una almena
   que pueda decir que es mía!

No ha media hora, ni aun un mediano momento, que me vi señor de reyes y de
emperadores, llenas mis caballerizas y mis cofres y sacos de infinitos
caballos y de innumerables galas, y agora me veo desolado y abatido, pobre
y mendigo, y, sobre todo, sin mi mono, que a fe que primero que le vuelva a
mi poder me han de sudar los dientes; y todo por la furia mal considerada
deste señor caballero, de quien se dice que ampara pupilos, y endereza
tuertos, y hace otras obras caritativas; y en mí solo ha venido a
faltar su intención generosa, que sean benditos y alabados los cielos, allá
donde tienen más levantados sus asientos. En fin, el Caballero de la Triste
Figura había de ser aquel que había de desfigurar las mías.

Enternecióse Sancho Panza con las razones de maese Pedro, y díjole:

-No llores, maese Pedro, ni te lamentes, que me quiebras el corazón; porque
te hago saber que es mi señor don Quijote tan católico y escrupuloso
cristiano, que si él cae en la cuenta de que te ha hecho algún agravio, te
lo sabrá y te lo querrá pagar y satisfacer con muchas ventajas.

-Con que me pagase el señor don Quijote alguna parte de las hechuras que me
ha deshecho, quedaría contento, y su merced aseguraría su conciencia,
porque no se puede salvar quien tiene lo ajeno contra la voluntad de su
dueño y no lo restituye.

-Así es -dijo don Quijote-, pero hasta ahora yo no sé que tenga nada
vuestro, maese Pedro.

-¿Cómo no? -respondió maese Pedro-; y estas reliquias que están por este
duro y estéril suelo, ¿quién las esparció y aniquiló, sino la fuerza
invencible dese poderoso brazo?, y ¿cúyos eran sus cuerpos sino míos?, y
¿con quién me sustentaba yo sino con ellos?

-Ahora acabo de creer -dijo a este punto don Quijote- lo que otras muchas
veces he creído: que estos encantadores que me persiguen no hacen sino
ponerme las figuras como ellas son delante de los ojos, y luego me las
mudan y truecan en las que ellos quieren. Real y verdaderamente os digo,
señores que me oís, que a mí me pareció todo lo que aquí ha pasado que
pasaba al pie de la letra: que Melisendra era Melisendra, don Gaiferos don
Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, y Carlomagno Carlomagno: por eso se me alteró
la cólera, y, por cumplir con mi profesión de caballero andante, quise dar
ayuda y favor a los que huían, y con este buen propósito hice lo que habéis
visto; si me ha salido al revés, no es culpa mía, sino de los malos que me
persiguen; y, con todo esto, deste mi yerro, aunque no ha procedido de
malicia, quiero yo mismo condenarme en costas: vea maese Pedro lo que
quiere por las figuras deshechas, que yo me ofrezco a pagárselo luego, en
buena y corriente moneda castellana.

Inclinósele maese Pedro, diciéndole:

-No esperaba yo menos de la inaudita cristiandad del valeroso don Quijote
de la Mancha, verdadero socorredor y amparo de todos los necesitados y
menesterosos vagamundos; y aquí el señor ventero y el gran Sancho serán
medianeros y apreciadores, entre vuesa merced y mí, de lo que valen o
podían valer las ya deshechas figuras.

El ventero y Sancho dijeron que así lo harían, y luego maese Pedro alzó del
suelo, con la cabeza menos, al rey Marsilio de Zaragoza, y dijo:

-Ya se vee cuán imposible es volver a este rey a su ser primero; y así, me
parece, salvo mejor juicio, que se me dé por su muerte, fin y acabamiento
cuatro reales y medio.

-¡Adelante! -dijo don Quijote.

-Pues por esta abertura de arriba abajo -prosiguió maese Pedro, tomando en
las manos al partido emperador Carlomagno-, no sería mucho que pidiese yo
cinco reales y un cuartillo.

-No es poco -dijo Sancho.

-Ni mucho -replicó el ventero-; médiese la partida y señálensele cinco
reales.

-Dénsele todos cinco y cuartillo -dijo don Quijote-, que no está en un
cuartillo más a menos la monta desta notable desgracia; y acabe presto
maese Pedro, que se hace hora de cenar, y yo tengo ciertos barruntos de
hambre.

-Por esta figura -dijo maese Pedro- que está sin narices y un ojo menos,
que es de la hermosa Melisendra, quiero, y me pongo en lo justo, dos reales
y doce maravedís.

-Aun ahí sería el diablo -dijo don Quijote-, si ya no estuviese Melisendra
con su esposo, por lo menos, en la raya de Francia; porque el caballo en
que iban, a mí me pareció que antes volaba que corría; y así, no hay para
qué venderme a mí el gato por liebre, presentándome aquí a Melisendra
desnarigada, estando la otra, si viene a mano, ahora holgándose en Francia
con su esposo a pierna tendida. Ayude Dios con lo suyo a cada uno, señor
maese Pedro, y caminemos todos con pie llano y con intención sana. Y
prosiga.

Maese Pedro, que vio que don Quijote izquierdeaba y que volvía a su
primer tema, no quiso que se le escapase; y así, le dijo:

-Ésta no debe de ser Melisendra, sino alguna de las doncellas que la
servían; y así, con sesenta maravedís que me den por ella quedaré contento
y bien pagado.

Desta manera fue poniendo precio a otras muchas destrozadas figuras, que
después los moderaron los dos jueces árbitros, con satisfación de las
partes, que llegaron a cuarenta reales y tres cuartillos; y, además desto,
que luego lo desembolsó Sancho, pidió maese Pedro dos reales por el trabajo
de tomar el mono.

-Dáselos, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, no para tomar el mono, sino la mona; y
docientos diera yo ahora en albricias a quien me dijera con certidumbre que
la señora doña Melisendra y el señor don Gaiferos estaban ya en Francia y
entre los suyos.

-Ninguno nos lo podrá decir mejor que mi mono -dijo maese Pedro-, pero no
habrá diablo que ahora le tome; aunque imagino que el cariño y la hambre le
han de forzar a que me busque esta noche, y amanecerá Dios y verémonos.

En resolución, la borrasca del retablo se acabó y todos cenaron en paz y en
buena compañía, a costa de don Quijote, que era liberal en todo estremo.

Antes que amaneciese, se fue el que llevaba las lanzas y las alabardas, y
ya después de amanecido, se vinieron a despedir de don Quijote el primo y
el paje: el uno, para volverse a su tierra; y el otro, a proseguir su
camino, para ayuda del cual le dio don Quijote una docena de reales. Maese
Pedro no quiso volver a entrar en más dimes ni diretes con don Quijote, a
quien él conocía muy bien, y así, madrugó antes que el sol, y, cogiendo las
reliquias de su retablo y a su mono, se fue también a buscar sus aventuras.
El ventero, que no conocía a don Quijote, tan admirado le tenían sus
locuras como su liberalidad. Finalmente, Sancho le pagó muy bien, por orden
de su señor, y, despidiéndose dél, casi a las ocho del día dejaron la venta
y se pusieron en camino, donde los dejaremos ir; que así conviene para dar
lugar a contar otras cosas pertenecientes a la declaración desta famosa
historia.





Capítulo XXVII. Donde se da cuenta quiénes eran maese Pedro y su mono, con
el mal suceso que don Quijote tuvo en la aventura del rebuzno, que no la
acabó como él quisiera y como lo tenía pensado


Entra Cide Hamete, coronista desta grande historia, con estas palabras en
este capítulo: ''Juro como católico cristiano...''; a lo que su traductor
dice que el jurar Cide Hamete como católico cristiano, siendo él moro, como
sin duda lo era, no quiso decir otra cosa sino que, así como el católico
cristiano cuando jura, jura, o debe jurar, verdad, y decirla en lo que
dijere, así él la decía, como si jurara como cristiano católico, en lo que
quería escribir de don Quijote, especialmente en decir quién era maese
Pedro, y quién el mono adivino que traía admirados todos aquellos pueblos
con sus adivinanzas.

Dice, pues, que bien se acordará, el que hubiere leído la primera parte
desta historia, de aquel Ginés de Pasamonte, a quien, entre otros galeotes,
dio libertad don Quijote en Sierra Morena, beneficio que después le fue mal
agradecido y peor pagado de aquella gente maligna y mal acostumbrada. Este
Ginés de Pasamonte, a quien don Quijote llamaba Ginesillo de Parapilla, fue
el que hurtó a Sancho Panza el rucio; que, por no haberse puesto el cómo ni
el cuándo en la primera parte, por culpa de los impresores, ha dado en qué
entender a muchos, que atribuían a poca memoria del autor la falta de
emprenta. Pero, en resolución, Ginés le hurtó, estando sobre él durmiendo
Sancho Panza, usando de la traza y modo que usó Brunelo cuando, estando
Sacripante sobre Albraca, le sacó el caballo de entre las piernas, y
después le cobró Sancho, como se ha contado. Este Ginés, pues, temeroso de
no ser hallado de la justicia, que le buscaba para castigarle de sus
infinitas bellaquerías y delitos, que fueron tantos y tales, que él mismo
compuso un gran volumen contándolos, determinó pasarse al reino de Aragón y
cubrirse el ojo izquierdo, acomodándose al oficio de titerero; que esto y
el jugar de manos lo sabía hacer por estremo.

Sucedió, pues, que de unos cristianos ya libres que venían de Berbería
compró aquel mono, a quien enseñó que, en haciéndole cierta señal, se le
subiese en el hombro y le murmurase, o lo pareciese, al oído. Hecho esto,
antes que entrase en el lugar donde entraba con su retablo y mono, se
informaba en el lugar más cercano, o de quien él mejor podía, qué cosas
particulares hubiesen sucedido en el tal lugar, y a qué personas; y,
llevándolas bien en la memoria, lo primero que hacía era mostrar su
retablo, el cual unas veces era de una historia, y otras de otra; pero
todas alegres y regocijadas y conocidas. Acabada la muestra, proponía las
habilidades de su mono, diciendo al pueblo que adivinaba todo lo pasado y
lo presente; pero que en lo de por venir no se daba maña. Por la respuesta
de cada pregunta pedía dos reales, y de algunas hacía barato, según tomaba
el pulso a los preguntantes; y como tal vez llegaba a las casas de quien él
sabía los sucesos de los que en ella moraban, aunque no le preguntasen nada
por no pagarle, él hacía la seña al mono, y luego decía que le había dicho
tal y tal cosa, que venía de molde con lo sucedido. Con esto cobraba
crédito inefable, y andábanse todos tras él. Otras veces, como era tan
discreto, respondía de manera que las respuestas venían bien con las
preguntas; y, como nadie le apuraba ni apretaba a que dijese cómo adevinaba
su mono, a todos hacía monas, y llenaba sus esqueros.

Así como entró en la venta, conoció a don Quijote y a Sancho, por cuyo
conocimiento le fue fácil poner en admiración a don Quijote y a Sancho
Panza, y a todos los que en ella estaban; pero hubiérale de costar caro si
don Quijote bajara un poco más la mano cuando cortó la cabeza al rey
Marsilio y destruyó toda su caballería, como queda dicho en el antecedente
capítulo.

Esto es lo que hay que decir de maese Pedro y de su mono.

Y, volviendo a don Quijote de la Mancha, digo que, después de haber salido
de la venta, determinó de ver primero las riberas del río Ebro y todos
aquellos contornos, antes de entrar en la ciudad de Zaragoza, pues le daba
tiempo para todo el mucho que faltaba desde allí a las justas. Con esta
intención siguió su camino, por el cual anduvo dos días sin acontecerle
cosa digna de ponerse en escritura, hasta que al tercero, al subir de una
loma, oyó un gran rumor de atambores, de trompetas y arcabuces. Al
principio pensó que algún tercio de soldados pasaba por aquella parte, y
por verlos picó a Rocinante y subió la loma arriba; y cuando estuvo en la
cumbre, vio al pie della, a su parecer, más de docientos hombres armados de
diferentes suertes de armas, como si dijésemos lanzones, ballestas,
partesanas, alabardas y picas, y algunos arcabuces, y muchas rodelas. Bajó
del recuesto y acercóse al escuadrón, tanto, que distintamente vio las
banderas, juzgó de las colores y notó las empresas que en ellas traían,
especialmente una que en un estandarte o jirón de raso blanco venía, en el
cual estaba pintado muy al vivo un asno como un pequeño sardesco, la cabeza
levantada, la boca abierta y la lengua de fuera, en acto y postura como si
estuviera rebuznando; alrededor dél estaban escritos de letras grandes
estos dos versos:

   No rebuznaron en balde
   el uno y el otro alcalde.

Por esta insignia sacó don Quijote que aquella gente debía de ser del
pueblo del rebuzno, y así se lo dijo a Sancho, declarándole lo que en el
estandarte venía escrito. Díjole también que el que les había dado noticia
de aquel caso se había errado en decir que dos regidores habían sido los
que rebuznaron; pero que, según los versos del estandarte, no habían sido
sino alcaldes. A lo que respondió Sancho Panza:

-Señor, en eso no hay que reparar, que bien puede ser que los regidores que
entonces rebuznaron viniesen con el tiempo a ser alcaldes de su pueblo, y
así, se pueden llamar con entrambos títulos; cuanto más, que no hace al
caso a la verdad de la historia ser los rebuznadores alcaldes o regidores,
como ellos una por una hayan rebuznado; porque tan a pique está de rebuznar
un alcalde como un regidor.

Finalmente, conocieron y supieron como el pueblo corrido salía a pelear con
otro que le corría más de lo justo y de lo que se debía a la buena
vecindad.

Fuese llegando a ellos don Quijote, no con poca pesadumbre de Sancho, que
nunca fue amigo de hallarse en semejantes jornadas. Los del escuadrón le
recogieron en medio, creyendo que era alguno de los de su parcialidad. Don
Quijote, alzando la visera, con gentil brío y continente, llegó hasta el
estandarte del asno, y allí se le pusieron alrededor todos los más
principales del ejército, por verle, admirados con la admiración
acostumbrada en que caían todos aquellos que la vez primera le miraban. Don
Quijote, que los vio tan atentos a mirarle, sin que ninguno le hablase ni
le preguntase nada, quiso aprovecharse de aquel silencio, y, rompiendo el
suyo, alzó la voz y dijo:

-Buenos señores, cuan encarecidamente puedo, os suplico que no interrumpáis
un razonamiento que quiero haceros, hasta que veáis que os disgusta y
enfada; que si esto sucede, con la más mínima señal que me hagáis pondré un
sello en mi boca y echaré una mordaza a mi lengua.

Todos le dijeron que dijese lo que quisiese, que de buena gana le
escucharían. Don Quijote, con esta licencia, prosiguió diciendo:

Yo, señores míos, soy caballero andante, cuyo ejercicio es el de las armas,
y cuya profesión la de favorecer a los necesitados de favor y acudir a los
menesterosos. Días ha que he sabido vuestra desgracia y la causa que os
mueve a tomar las armas a cada paso, para vengaros de vuestros enemigos; y,
habiendo discurrido una y muchas veces en mi entendimiento sobre vuestro
negocio, hallo, según las leyes del duelo, que estáis engañados en teneros
por afrentados, porque ningún particular puede afrentar a un pueblo entero,
si no es retándole de traidor por junto, porque no sabe en particular quién
cometió la traición por que le reta. Ejemplo desto tenemos en don Diego
Ordóñez de Lara, que retó a todo el pueblo zamorano, porque ignoraba que
solo Vellido Dolfos había cometido la traición de matar a su rey; y así,
retó a todos, y a todos tocaba la venganza y la respuesta; aunque bien es
verdad que el señor don Diego anduvo algo demasiado, y aun pasó muy
adelante de los límites del reto, porque no tenía para qué retar a los
muertos, a las aguas, ni a los panes, ni a los que estaban por nacer, ni a
las otras menudencias que allí se declaran; pero, ¡vaya!, pues cuando la
cólera sale de madre, no tiene la lengua padre, ayo ni freno que la
corrija. Siendo, pues, esto así, que uno solo no puede afrentar a reino,
provincia, ciudad, república ni pueblo entero, queda en limpio que no hay
para qué salir a la venganza del reto de la tal afrenta, pues no lo es;
porque, ¡bueno sería que se matasen a cada paso los del pueblo de la Reloja
con quien se lo llama, ni los cazoleros, berenjeneros, ballenatos,
jaboneros, ni los de otros nombres y apellidos que andan por ahí en boca de
los muchachos y de gente de poco más a menos! ¡Bueno sería, por cierto, que
todos estos insignes pueblos se corriesen y vengasen, y anduviesen contino
hechas las espadas sacabuches a cualquier pendencia, por pequeña que fuese!
No, no, ni Dios lo permita o quiera. Los varones prudentes, las repúblicas
bien concertadas, por cuatro cosas han de tomar las armas y desenvainar las
espadas, y poner a riesgo sus personas, vidas y haciendas: la primera, por
defender la fe católica; la segunda, por defender su vida, que es de ley
natural y divina; la tercera, en defensa de su honra, de su familia y
hacienda; la cuarta, en servicio de su rey, en la guerra justa; y si le
quisiéremos añadir la quinta, que se puede contar por segunda, es en
defensa de su patria. A estas cinco causas, como capitales, se pueden
agregar algunas otras que sean justas y razonables, y que obliguen a tomar
las armas; pero tomarlas por niñerías y por cosas que antes son de risa y
pasatiempo que de afrenta, parece que quien las toma carece de todo
razonable discurso; cuanto más, que el tomar venganza injusta, que justa no
puede haber alguna que lo sea, va derechamente contra la santa ley que
profesamos, en la cual se nos manda que hagamos bien a nuestros enemigos y
que amemos a los que nos aborrecen; mandamiento que, aunque parece algo
dificultoso de cumplir, no lo es sino para aquellos que tienen menos de
Dios que del mundo, y más de carne que de espíritu; porque Jesucristo, Dios
y hombre verdadero, que nunca mintió, ni pudo ni puede mentir, siendo
legislador nuestro, dijo que su yugo era suave y su carga liviana; y así,
no nos había de mandar cosa que fuese imposible el cumplirla. Así que, mis
señores, vuesas mercedes están obligados por leyes divinas y humanas a
sosegarse.

-El diablo me lleve -dijo a esta sazón Sancho entre sí- si este mi amo no
es tólogo; y si no lo es, que lo parece como un güevo a otro.

Tomó un poco de aliento don Quijote, y, viendo que todavía le prestaban
silencio, quiso pasar adelante en su plática, como pasara ni no se pusiere
en medio la agudeza de Sancho, el cual, viendo que su amo se detenía, tomó
la mano por él, diciendo:

-Mi señor don Quijote de la Mancha, que un tiempo se llamó el Caballero de
la Triste Figura y ahora se llama el Caballero de los Leones, es un hidalgo
muy atentado, que sabe latín y romance como un bachiller, y en todo cuanto
trata y aconseja procede como muy buen soldado, y tiene todas las leyes y
ordenanzas de lo que llaman el duelo en la uña; y así, no hay más que hacer
sino dejarse llevar por lo que él dijere, y sobre mí si lo erraren; cuanto
más, que ello se está dicho que es necedad correrse por sólo oír un
rebuzno, que yo me acuerdo, cuando muchacho, que rebuznaba cada y cuando
que se me antojaba, sin que nadie me fuese a la mano, y con tanta gracia y
propiedad que, en rebuznando yo, rebuznaban todos los asnos del pueblo, y
no por eso dejaba de ser hijo de mis padres, que eran honradísimos; y,
aunque por esta habilidad era invidiado de más de cuatro de los estirados
de mi pueblo, no se me daba dos ardites. Y, porque se vea que digo verdad,
esperen y escuchen, que esta ciencia es como la del nadar: que, una vez
aprendida, nunca se olvida.

Y luego, puesta la mano en las narices, comenzó a rebuznar tan reciamente,
que todos los cercanos valles retumbaron. Pero uno de los que estaban junto
a él, creyendo que hacía burla dellos, alzó un varapalo que en la mano
tenía, y diole tal golpe con él, que, sin ser poderoso a otra cosa, dio con
Sancho Panza en el suelo. Don Quijote, que vio tan malparado a Sancho,
arremetió al que le había dado, con la lanza sobre mano, pero fueron tantos
los que se pusieron en medio, que no fue posible vengarle; antes, viendo
que llovía sobre él un nublado de piedras, y que le amenazaban mil
encaradas ballestas y no menos cantidad de arcabuces, volvió las riendas a
Rocinante, y a todo lo que su galope pudo, se salió de entre ellos,
encomendándose de todo corazón a Dios, que de aquel peligro le librase,
temiendo a cada paso no le entrase alguna bala por las espaldas y le
saliese al pecho; y a cada punto recogía el aliento, por ver si le faltaba.

Pero los del escuadrón se contentaron con verle huir, sin tirarle. A Sancho
le pusieron sobre su jumento, apenas vuelto en sí, y le dejaron ir tras su
amo, no porque él tuviese sentido para regirle; pero el rucio siguió las
huellas de Rocinante, sin el cual no se hallaba un punto. Alongado, pues,
don Quijote buen trecho, volvió la cabeza y vio que Sancho venía, y
atendióle, viendo que ninguno le seguía.

Los del escuadrón se estuvieron allí hasta la noche, y, por no haber salido
a la batalla sus contrarios, se volvieron a su pueblo, regocijados y
alegres; y si ellos supieran la costumbre antigua de los griegos,
levantaran en aquel lugar y sitio un trofeo.





Capítulo XXVIII. De cosas que dice Benengeli que las sabrá quien le leyere,
si las lee con atención


Cuando el valiente huye, la superchería está descubierta, y es de varones
prudentes guardarse para mejor ocasión. Esta verdad se verificó en don
Quijote, el cual, dando lugar a la furia del pueblo y a las malas
intenciones de aquel indignado escuadrón, puso pies en polvorosa, y, sin
acordarse de Sancho ni del peligro en que le dejaba, se apartó tanto cuanto
le pareció que bastaba para estar seguro. Seguíale Sancho, atravesado en su
jumento, como queda referido. Llegó, en fin, ya vuelto en su acuerdo, y al
llegar, se dejó caer del rucio a los pies de Rocinante, todo ansioso, todo
molido y todo apaleado. Apeóse don Quijote para catarle las feridas; pero,
como le hallase sano de los pies a la cabeza, con asaz cólera le dijo:

-¡Tan en hora mala supistes vos rebuznar, Sancho! Y ¿dónde hallastes vos
ser bueno el nombrar la soga en casa del ahorcado? A música de rebuznos,
¿qué contrapunto se había de llevar sino de varapalos? Y dad gracias a
Dios, Sancho, que ya que os santiguaron con un palo, no os hicieron el per
signum crucis con un alfanje.

-No estoy para responder -respondió Sancho-, porque me parece que hablo por
las espaldas. Subamos y apartémonos de aquí, que yo pondré silencio en mis
rebuznos, pero no en dejar de decir que los caballeros andantes huyen, y
dejan a sus buenos escuderos molidos como alheña, o como cibera, en poder
de sus enemigos.

-No huye el que se retira -respondió don Quijote-, porque has de saber,
Sancho, que la valentía que no se funda sobre la basa de la prudencia se
llama temeridad, y las hazañas del temerario más se atribuyen a la buena
fortuna que a su ánimo. Y así, yo confieso que me he retirado, pero no
huido; y en esto he imitado a muchos valientes, que se han guardado para
tiempos mejores, y desto están las historias llenas, las cuales, por no
serte a ti de provecho ni a mí de gusto, no te las refiero ahora.

En esto, ya estaba a caballo Sancho, ayudado de don Quijote, el cual
asimismo subió en Rocinante, y poco a poco se fueron a emboscar en una
alameda que hasta un cuarto de legua de allí se parecía. De cuando en
cuando daba Sancho unos ayes profundísimos y unos gemidos dolorosos; y,
preguntándole don Quijote la causa de tan amargo sentimiento, respondió
que, desde la punta del espinazo hasta la nuca del celebro, le dolía de
manera que le sacaba de sentido.

-La causa dese dolor debe de ser, sin duda -dijo don Quijote-, que, como
era el palo con que te dieron largo y tendido, te cogió todas las espaldas,
donde entran todas esas partes que te duelen; y si más te cogiera, más te
doliera.

-¡Por Dios -dijo Sancho-, que vuesa merced me ha sacado de una gran duda, y
que me la ha declarado por lindos términos! ¡Cuerpo de mí! ¿Tan encubierta
estaba la causa de mi dolor que ha sido menester decirme que me duele todo
todo aquello que alcanzó el palo? Si me dolieran los tobillos, aún pudiera
ser que se anduviera adivinando el porqué me dolían, pero dolerme lo que me
molieron no es mucho adivinar. A la fe, señor nuestro amo, el mal ajeno de
pelo cuelga, y cada día voy descubriendo tierra de lo poco que puedo
esperar de la compañía que con vuestra merced tengo; porque si esta vez me
ha dejado apalear, otra y otras ciento volveremos a los manteamientos de
marras y a otras muchacherías, que si ahora me han salido a las espaldas,
después me saldrán a los ojos. Harto mejor haría yo, sino que soy un
bárbaro, y no haré nada que bueno sea en toda mi vida; harto mejor haría
yo, vuelvo a decir, en volverme a mi casa, y a mi mujer, y a mis hijos, y
sustentarla y criarlos con lo que Dios fue servido de darme, y no andarme
tras vuesa merced por caminos sin camino y por sendas y carreras que no las
tienen, bebiendo mal y comiendo peor. Pues, ¡tomadme el dormir! Contad,
hermano escudero, siete pies de tierra, y si quisiéredes más, tomad otros
tantos, que en vuestra mano está escudillar, y tendeos a todo vuestro buen
talante; que quemado vea yo y hecho polvos al primero que dio puntada en la
andante caballería, o, a lo menos, al primero que quiso ser escudero de
tales tontos como debieron ser todos los caballeros andantes pasados. De
los presentes no digo nada, que, por ser vuestra merced uno dellos, los
tengo respeto, y porque sé que sabe vuesa merced un punto más que el diablo
en cuanto habla y en cuanto piensa.

-Haría yo una buena apuesta con vos, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-: que ahora
que vais hablando sin que nadie os vaya a la mano, que no os duele nada en
todo vuestro cuerpo. Hablad, hijo mío, todo aquello que os viniere al
pensamiento y a la boca; que, a trueco de que a vos no os duela nada,
tendré yo por gusto el enfado que me dan vuestras impertinencias. Y si
tanto deseáis volveros a vuestra casa con vuestra mujer y hijos, no permita
Dios que yo os lo impida; dineros tenéis míos: mirad cuánto ha que esta
tercera vez salimos de nuestro pueblo, y mirad lo que podéis y debéis ganar
cada mes, y pagaos de vuestra mano.

-Cuando yo servía -respondió Sancho- a Tomé Carrasco, el padre del
bachiller Sansón Carrasco, que vuestra merced bien conoce, dos ducados
ganaba cada mes, amén de la comida; con vuestra merced no sé lo que puedo
ganar, puesto que sé que tiene más trabajo el escudero del caballero
andante que el que sirve a un labrador; que, en resolución, los que
servimos a labradores, por mucho que trabajemos de día, por mal que suceda,
a la noche cenamos olla y dormimos en cama, en la cual no he dormido
después que ha que sirvo a vuestra merced. Si no ha sido el tiempo breve
que estuvimos en casa de don Diego de Miranda, y la jira que tuve con la
espuma que saqué de las ollas de Camacho, y lo que comí y bebí y dormí en
casa de Basilio, todo el otro tiempo he dormido en la dura tierra, al cielo
abierto, sujeto a lo que dicen inclemencias del cielo, sustentándome con
rajas de queso y mendrugos de pan, y bebiendo aguas, ya de arroyos, ya de
fuentes, de las que encontramos por esos andurriales donde andamos.

-Confieso -dijo don Quijote- que todo lo que dices, Sancho, sea verdad.
¿Cuánto parece que os debo dar más de lo que os daba Tomé Carrasco?

-A mi parecer -dijo Sancho-, con dos reales más que vuestra merced añadiese
cada mes me tendría por bien pagado. Esto es cuanto al salario de mi
trabajo; pero, en cuanto a satisfacerme a la palabra y promesa que vuestra
merced me tiene hecha de darme el gobierno de una ínsula, sería justo que
se me añadiesen otros seis reales, que por todos serían treinta.

-Está muy bien -replicó don Quijote-; y, conforme al salario que vos os
habéis señalado, 23 días ha que salimos de nuestro pueblo: contad, Sancho,
rata por cantidad, y mirad lo que os debo, y pagaos, como os tengo dicho,
de vuestra mano.

-¡Oh, cuerpo de mí! -dijo Sancho-, que va vuestra merced muy errado en esta
cuenta, porque en lo de la promesa de la ínsula se ha de contar desde el
día que vuestra merced me la prometió hasta la presente hora en que
estamos.

-Pues, ¿qué tanto ha, Sancho, que os la prometí? -dijo don Quijote.

-Si yo mal no me acuerdo -respondió Sancho-, debe de haber más de veinte
años, tres días más a menos.

Diose don Quijote una gran palmada en la frente, y comenzó a reír muy de
gana, y dijo:

-Pues no anduve yo en Sierra Morena, ni en todo el discurso de nuestras
salidas, sino dos meses apenas, y ¿dices, Sancho, que ha veinte años que te
prometí la ínsula? Ahora digo que quieres que se consuman en tus salarios
el dinero que tienes mío; y si esto es así, y tú gustas dello, desde aquí
te lo doy, y buen provecho te haga; que, a trueco de verme sin tan mal
escudero, holgaréme de quedarme pobre y sin blanca. Pero dime, prevaricador
de las ordenanzas escuderiles de la andante caballería, ¿dónde has visto
tú, o leído, que ningún escudero de caballero andante se haya puesto con su
señor en tanto más cuánto me habéis de dar cada mes porque os sirva?
Éntrate, éntrate, malandrín, follón y vestiglo, que todo lo pareces;
éntrate, digo, por el mare magnum de sus historias, y si hallares que algún
escudero haya dicho, ni pensado, lo que aquí has dicho, quiero que me le
claves en la frente, y, por añadidura, me hagas cuatro mamonas selladas en
mi rostro. Vuelve las riendas, o el cabestro, al rucio, y vuélvete a tu
casa, porque un solo paso desde aquí no has de pasar más adelante conmigo.
¡Oh pan mal conocido! ¡Oh promesas mal colocadas! ¡Oh hombre que tiene más
de bestia que de persona! ¿Ahora, cuando yo pensaba ponerte en estado, y
tal, que a pesar de tu mujer te llamaran señoría, te despides? ¿Ahora te
vas, cuando yo venía con intención firme y valedera de hacerte señor de la
mejor ínsula del mundo? En fin, como tú has dicho otras veces, no es la
miel... etc. Asno eres, y asno has de ser, y en asno has de parar cuando se
te acabe el curso de la vida; que para mí tengo que antes llegará ella a su
último término que tú caigas y des en la cuenta de que eres bestia.

Miraba Sancho a don Quijote de en hito en hito, en tanto que los tales
vituperios le decía, y compungióse de manera que le vinieron las lágrimas a
los ojos, y con voz dolorida y enferma le dijo:

-Señor mío, yo confieso que para ser del todo asno no me falta más de la
cola; si vuestra merced quiere ponérmela, yo la daré por bien puesta, y le
serviré como jumento todos los días que me quedan de mi vida. Vuestra
merced me perdone y se duela de mi mocedad, y advierta que sé poco, y que
si hablo mucho, más procede de enfermedad que de malicia; mas, quien yerra
y se enmienda, a Dios se encomienda.

-Maravillárame yo, Sancho, si no mezclaras algún refrancico en tu coloquio.
Ahora bien, yo te perdono, con que te emiendes, y con que no te muestres de
aquí adelante tan amigo de tu interés, sino que procures ensanchar el
corazón, y te alientes y animes a esperar el cumplimiento de mis promesas,
que, aunque se tarda, no se imposibilita.

Sancho respondió que sí haría, aunque sacase fuerzas de flaqueza.

Con esto, se metieron en la alameda, y don Quijote se acomodó al pie de un
olmo, y Sancho al de una haya; que estos tales árboles y otros sus
semejantes siempre tienen pies, y no manos. Sancho pasó la noche
penosamente, porque el varapalo se hacía más sentir con el sereno. Don
Quijote la pasó en sus continuas memorias; pero, con todo eso, dieron los
ojos al sueño, y al salir del alba siguieron su camino buscando las riberas
del famoso Ebro, donde les sucedió lo que se contará en el capítulo
venidero.





Capítulo XXIX. De la famosa aventura del barco encantado


Por sus pasos contados y por contar, dos días después que salieron de la
alameda, llegaron don Quijote y Sancho al río Ebro, y el verle fue de gran
gusto a don Quijote, porque contempló y miró en él la amenidad de sus
riberas, la claridad de sus aguas, el sosiego de su curso y la abundancia
de sus líquidos cristales, cuya alegre vista renovó en su memoria mil
amorosos pensamientos. Especialmente fue y vino en lo que había visto en la
cueva de Montesinos; que, puesto que el mono de maese Pedro le había dicho
que parte de aquellas cosas eran verdad y parte mentira, él se atenía más a
las verdaderas que a las mentirosas, bien al revés de Sancho, que todas las
tenía por la mesma mentira.

Yendo, pues, desta manera, se le ofreció a la vista un pequeño barco sin
remos ni otras jarcias algunas, que estaba atado en la orilla a un tronco
de un árbol que en la ribera estaba. Miró don Quijote a todas partes, y no
vio persona alguna; y luego, sin más ni más, se apeó de Rocinante y mandó a
Sancho que lo mesmo hiciese del rucio, y que a entrambas bestias las atase
muy bien, juntas, al tronco de un álamo o sauce que allí estaba. Preguntóle
Sancho la causa de aquel súbito apeamiento y de aquel ligamiento. Respondió
don Quijote:

-Has de saber, Sancho, que este barco que aquí está, derechamente y sin
poder ser otra cosa en contrario, me está llamando y convidando a que entre
en él, y vaya en él a dar socorro a algún caballero, o a otra necesitada y
principal persona, que debe de estar puesta en alguna grande cuita, porque
éste es estilo de los libros de las historias caballerescas y de los
encantadores que en ellas se entremeten y platican: cuando algún caballero
está puesto en algún trabajo, que no puede ser librado dél sino por la mano
de otro caballero, puesto que estén distantes el uno del otro dos o tres
mil leguas, y aun más, o le arrebatan en una nube o le deparan un barco
donde se entre, y en menos de un abrir y cerrar de ojos le llevan, o por
los aires, o por la mar, donde quieren y adonde es menester su ayuda; así
que, ¡oh Sancho!, este barco está puesto aquí para el mesmo efecto; y esto
es tan verdad como es ahora de día; y antes que éste se pase, ata juntos al
rucio y a Rocinante, y a la mano de Dios, que nos guíe, que no dejaré de
embarcarme si me lo pidiesen frailes descalzos.

-Pues así es -respondió Sancho-, y vuestra merced quiere dar a cada paso en
estos que no sé si los llame disparates, no hay sino obedecer y bajar la
cabeza, atendiendo al refrán "haz lo que tu amo te manda, y siéntate con él
a la mesa"; pero, con todo esto, por lo que toca al descargo de mi
conciencia, quiero advertir a vuestra merced que a mí me parece que este
tal barco no es de los encantados, sino de algunos pescadores deste río,
porque en él se pescan las mejores sabogas del mundo.

Esto decía, mientras ataba las bestias, Sancho, dejándolas a la proteción y
amparo de los encantadores, con harto dolor de su ánima. Don Quijote le
dijo que no tuviese pena del desamparo de aquellos animales, que el que los
llevaría a ellos por tan longincuos caminos y regiones tendría cuenta de
sustentarlos.

-No entiendo eso de logicuos -dijo Sancho-, ni he oído tal vocablo en todos
los días de mi vida.

-Longincuos -respondió don Quijote- quiere decir apartados; y no es
maravilla que no lo entiendas, que no estás tú obligado a saber latín, como
algunos que presumen que lo saben, y lo ignoran.

-Ya están atados -replicó Sancho-. ¿Qué hemos de hacer ahora?

-¿Qué? -respondió don Quijote-. Santiguarnos y levar ferro; quiero decir,
embarcarnos y cortar la amarra con que este barco está atado.

Y, dando un salto en él, siguiéndole Sancho, cortó el cordel, y el barco se
fue apartando poco a poco de la ribera; y cuando Sancho se vio obra de dos
varas dentro del río, comenzó a temblar, temiendo su perdición; pero
ninguna cosa le dio más pena que el oír roznar al rucio y el ver que
Rocinante pugnaba por desatarse, y díjole a su señor:

-El rucio rebuzna, condolido de nuestra ausencia, y Rocinante procura
ponerse en libertad para arrojarse tras nosotros. ¡Oh carísimos amigos,
quedaos en paz, y la locura que nos aparta de vosotros, convertida en
desengaño, nos vuelva a vuestra presencia!

Y, en esto, comenzó a llorar tan amargamente que don Quijote, mohíno y
colérico, le dijo:

-¿De qué temes, cobarde criatura? ¿De qué lloras, corazón de mantequillas?
¿Quién te persigue, o quién te acosa, ánimo de ratón casero, o qué te
falta, menesteroso en la mitad de las entrañas de la abundancia? ¿Por dicha
vas caminando a pie y descalzo por las montañas rifeas, sino sentado en una
tabla, como un archiduque, por el sesgo curso deste agradable río, de donde
en breve espacio saldremos al mar dilatado? Pero ya habemos de haber
salido, y caminado, por lo menos, setecientas o ochocientas leguas; y si yo
tuviera aquí un astrolabio con que tomar la altura del polo, yo te dijera
las que hemos caminado; aunque, o yo sé poco, o ya hemos pasado, o
pasaremos presto, por la línea equinocial, que divide y corta los dos
contrapuestos polos en igual distancia.

-Y cuando lleguemos a esa leña que vuestra merced dice -preguntó Sancho-,
¿cuánto habremos caminado?

-Mucho -replicó don Quijote-, porque de trecientos y sesenta grados que
contiene el globo, del agua y de la tierra, según el cómputo de Ptolomeo,
que fue el mayor cosmógrafo que se sabe, la mitad habremos caminado,
llegando a la línea que he dicho.

-Por Dios -dijo Sancho-, que vuesa merced me trae por testigo de lo que
dice a una gentil persona, puto y gafo, con la añadidura de meón, o meo, o
no sé cómo.

Rióse don Quijote de la interpretación que Sancho había dado al nombre y al
cómputo y cuenta del cosmógrafo Ptolomeo, y díjole:

-Sabrás, Sancho, que los españoles y los que se embarcan en Cádiz para ir a
las Indias Orientales, una de las señales que tienen para entender que han
pasado la línea equinocial que te he dicho es que a todos los que van en el
navío se les mueren los piojos, sin que les quede ninguno, ni en todo el
bajel le hallarán, si le pesan a oro; y así, puedes, Sancho, pasear una
mano por un muslo, y si topares cosa viva, saldremos desta duda; y si no,
pasado habemos.

-Yo no creo nada deso -respondió Sancho-, pero, con todo, haré lo que vuesa
merced me manda, aunque no sé para qué hay necesidad de hacer esas
experiencias, pues yo veo con mis mismos ojos que no nos habemos apartado
de la ribera cinco varas, ni hemos decantado de donde están las alemañas
dos varas, porque allí están Rocinante y el rucio en el propio lugar do los
dejamos; y tomada la mira, como yo la tomo ahora, voto a tal que no nos
movemos ni andamos al paso de una hormiga.

-Haz, Sancho, la averiguación que te he dicho, y no te cures de otra, que
tú no sabes qué cosa sean coluros, líneas, paralelos, zodíacos, clíticas,
polos, solsticios, equinocios, planetas, signos, puntos, medidas, de que se
compone la esfera celeste y terrestre; que si todas estas cosas supieras, o
parte dellas, vieras claramente qué de paralelos hemos cortado, qué de
signos visto y qué de imágines hemos dejado atrás y vamos dejando ahora. Y
tórnote a decir que te tientes y pesques, que yo para mí tengo que estás
más limpio que un pliego de papel liso y blanco.

Tentóse Sancho, y, llegando con la mano bonitamente y con tiento hacia la
corva izquierda, alzó la cabeza y miró a su amo, y dijo:

-O la experiencia es falsa, o no hemos llegado adonde vuesa merced dice, ni
con muchas leguas.

-Pues ¿qué? -preguntó don Quijote-, ¿has topado algo?

-¡Y aun algos! -respondió Sancho.

Y, sacudiéndose los dedos, se lavó toda la mano en el río, por el cual
sosegadamente se deslizaba el barco por mitad de la corriente, sin que le
moviese alguna inteligencia secreta, ni algún encantador escondido, sino el
mismo curso del agua, blando entonces y suave.

En esto, descubrieron unas grandes aceñas que en la mitad del río estaban;
y apenas las hubo visto don Quijote, cuando con voz alta dijo a Sancho:

-¿Vees? Allí, ¡oh amigo!, se descubre la ciudad, castillo o fortaleza donde
debe de estar algún caballero oprimido, o alguna reina, infanta o princesa
malparada, para cuyo socorro soy aquí traído.

-¿Qué diablos de ciudad, fortaleza o castillo dice vuesa merced, señor?
-dijo Sancho-. ¿No echa de ver que aquéllas son aceñas que están en el río,
donde se muele el trigo?

-Calla, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-; que, aunque parecen aceñas, no lo son; y
ya te he dicho que todas las cosas trastruecan y mudan de su ser natural
los encantos. No quiero decir que las mudan de en uno en otro ser
realmente, sino que lo parece, como lo mostró la experiencia en la
transformación de Dulcinea, único refugio de mis esperanzas.

En esto, el barco, entrado en la mitad de la corriente del río, comenzó a
caminar no tan lentamente como hasta allí. Los molineros de las aceñas, que
vieron venir aquel barco por el río, y que se iba a embocar por el raudal
de las ruedas, salieron con presteza muchos dellos con varas largas a
detenerle, y, como salían enharinados, y cubiertos los rostros y los
vestidos del polvo de la harina, representaban una mala vista. Daban voces
grandes, diciendo:

-¡Demonios de hombres! ¿Dónde vais? ¿Venís desesperados? ¿Qué queréis,
ahogaros y haceros pedazos en estas ruedas?

-¿No te dije yo, Sancho -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-, que habíamos
llegado donde he de mostrar a dó llega el valor de mi brazo? Mira qué de
malandrines y follones me salen al encuentro, mira cuántos vestiglos se me
oponen, mira cuántas feas cataduras nos hacen cocos... Pues ¡ahora lo
veréis, bellacos!

Y, puesto en pie en el barco, con grandes voces comenzó a amenazar a los
molineros, diciéndoles:

-Canalla malvada y peor aconsejada, dejad en su libertad y libre albedrío a
la persona que en esa vuestra fortaleza o prisión tenéis oprimida, alta o
baja, de cualquiera suerte o calidad que sea, que yo soy don Quijote de la
Mancha, llamado el Caballero de los Leones por otro nombre, a quien está
reservada por orden de los altos cielos el dar fin felice a esta aventura.

Y, diciendo esto, echó mano a su espada y comenzó a esgrimirla en el aire
contra los molineros; los cuales, oyendo y no entendiendo aquellas
sandeces, se pusieron con sus varas a detener el barco, que ya iba entrando
en el raudal y canal de las ruedas.

Púsose Sancho de rodillas, pidiendo devotamente al cielo le librase de tan
manifiesto peligro, como lo hizo, por la industria y presteza de los
molineros, que, oponiéndose con sus palos al barco, le detuvieron, pero no
de manera que dejasen de trastornar el barco y dar con don Quijote y con
Sancho al través en el agua; pero vínole bien a don Quijote, que sabía
nadar como un ganso, aunque el peso de las armas le llevó al fondo dos
veces; y si no fuera por los molineros, que se arrojaron al agua y los
sacaron como en peso a entrambos, allí había sido Troya para los dos.

Puestos, pues, en tierra, más mojados que muertos de sed, Sancho, puesto de
rodillas, las manos juntas y los ojos clavados al cielo, pidió a Dios con
una larga y devota plegaria le librase de allí adelante de los atrevidos
deseos y acometimientos de su señor.

Llegaron en esto los pescadores dueños del barco, a quien habían hecho
pedazos las ruedas de las aceñas; y, viéndole roto, acometieron a desnudar
a Sancho, y a pedir a don Quijote se lo pagase; el cual, con gran sosiego,
como si no hubiera pasado nada por él, dijo a los molineros y pescadores
que él pagaría el barco de bonísima gana, con condición que le diesen libre
y sin cautela a la persona o personas que en aquel su castillo estaban
oprimidas.

-¿Qué personas o qué castillo dice -respondió uno de los molineros-, hombre
sin juicio? ¿Quiéreste llevar por ventura las que vienen a moler trigo a
estas aceñas?

-¡Basta! -dijo entre sí don Quijote-. Aquí será predicar en desierto
querer reducir a esta canalla a que por ruegos haga virtud alguna. Y en
esta aventura se deben de haber encontrado dos valientes encantadores, y el
uno estorba lo que el otro intenta: el uno me deparó el barco, y el otro
dio conmigo al través. Dios lo remedie, que todo este mundo es máquinas y
trazas, contrarias unas de otras. Yo no puedo más.

Y, alzando la voz, prosiguió diciendo, y mirando a las aceñas:

-Amigos, cualesquiera que seáis, que en esa prisión quedáis encerrados,
perdonadme; que, por mi desgracia y por la vuestra, yo no os puedo sacar de
vuestra cuita. Para otro caballero debe de estar guardada y reservada esta
aventura.

En diciendo esto, se concertó con los pescadores, y pagó por el barco
cincuenta reales, que los dio Sancho de muy mala gana, diciendo:

-A dos barcadas como éstas, daremos con todo el caudal al fondo.

Los pescadores y molineros estaban admirados, mirando aquellas dos figuras
tan fuera del uso, al parecer, de los otros hombres, y no acababan de
entender a dó se encaminaban las razones y preguntas que don Quijote les
decía; y, teniéndolos por locos, les dejaron y se recogieron a sus aceñas,
y los pescadores a sus ranchos. Volvieron a sus bestias, y a ser bestias,
don Quijote y Sancho, y este fin tuvo la aventura del encantado barco.





Capítulo XXX. De lo que le avino a don Quijote con una bella cazadora


Asaz melancólicos y de mal talante llegaron a sus animales caballero y
escudero, especialmente Sancho, a quien llegaba al alma llegar al caudal
del dinero, pareciéndole que todo lo que dél se quitaba era quitárselo a
él de las niñas de sus ojos. Finalmente, sin hablarse palabra, se pusieron
a caballo y se apartaron del famoso río, don Quijote sepultado en los
pensamientos de sus amores, y Sancho en los de su acrecentamiento, que por
entonces le parecía que estaba bien lejos de tenerle; porque, maguer era
tonto, bien se le alcanzaba que las acciones de su amo, todas o las más,
eran disparates, y buscaba ocasión de que, sin entrar en cuentas ni en
despedimientos con su señor, un día se desgarrase y se fuese a su casa.
Pero la fortuna ordenó las cosas muy al revés de lo que él temía.

Sucedió, pues, que otro día, al poner del sol y al salir de una selva,
tendió don Quijote la vista por un verde prado, y en lo último dél vio
gente, y, llegándose cerca, conoció que eran cazadores de altanería.
Llegóse más, y entre ellos vio una gallarda señora sobre un palafrén o
hacanea blanquísima, adornada de guarniciones verdes y con un sillón de
plata. Venía la señora asimismo vestida de verde, tan bizarra y ricamente
que la misma bizarría venía transformada en ella. En la mano izquierda
traía un azor, señal que dio a entender a don Quijote ser aquélla alguna
gran señora, que debía serlo de todos aquellos cazadores, como era la
verdad; y así, dijo a Sancho:

-Corre, hijo Sancho, y di a aquella señora del palafrén y del azor que yo,
el Caballero de los Leones, besa las manos a su gran fermosura, y que si su
grandeza me da licencia, se las iré a besar, y a servirla en cuanto mis
fuerzas pudieren y su alteza me mandare. Y mira, Sancho, cómo hablas, y ten
cuenta de no encajar algún refrán de los tuyos en tu embajada.

-¡Hallado os le habéis el encajador! -respondió Sancho-. ¡A mí con eso!
¡Sí, que no es ésta la vez primera que he llevado embajadas a altas y
crecidas señoras en esta vida!

-Si no fue la que llevaste a la señora Dulcinea -replicó don Quijote-, yo
no sé que hayas llevado otra, a lo menos en mi poder.

-Así es verdad -respondió Sancho-, pero al buen pagador no le duelen
prendas, y en casa llena presto se guisa la cena; quiero decir que a mí no
hay que decirme ni advertirme de nada, que para todo tengo y de todo se me
alcanza un poco.

-Yo lo creo, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-; ve en buena hora, y Dios te guíe.

Partió Sancho de carrera, sacando de su paso al rucio, y llegó donde la
bella cazadora estaba, y, apeándose, puesto ante ella de hinojos, le dijo:

-Hermosa señora, aquel caballero que allí se parece, llamado el Caballero
de los Leones, es mi amo, y yo soy un escudero suyo, a quien llaman en su
casa Sancho Panza. Este tal Caballero de los Leones, que no ha mucho que se
llamaba el de la Triste Figura, envía por mí a decir a vuestra grandeza sea
servida de darle licencia para que, con su propósito y beneplácito y
consentimiento, él venga a poner en obra su deseo, que no es otro, según él
dice y yo pienso, que de servir a vuestra encumbrada altanería y fermosura;
que en dársela vuestra señoría hará cosa que redunde en su pro, y él
recibirá señaladísima merced y contento.

-Por cierto, buen escudero -respondió la señora-, vos habéis dado la
embajada vuestra con todas aquellas circunstancias que las tales embajadas
piden. Levantaos del suelo, que escudero de tan gran caballero como es el
de la Triste Figura, de quien ya tenemos acá mucha noticia, no es justo que
esté de hinojos; levantaos, amigo, y decid a vuestro señor que venga mucho
en hora buena a servirse de mí y del duque mi marido, en una casa de placer
que aquí tenemos.

Levantóse Sancho admirado, así de la hermosura de la buena señora como de
su mucha crianza y cortesía, y más de lo que le había dicho que tenía
noticia de su señor el Caballero de la Triste Figura, y que si no le
había llamado el de los Leones, debía de ser por habérsele puesto tan
nuevamente. Preguntóle la duquesa, cuyo título aún no se sabe:

-Decidme, hermano escudero: este vuestro señor, ¿no es uno de quien anda
impresa una historia que se llama del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la
Mancha, que tiene por señora de su alma a una tal Dulcinea del Toboso?

-El mesmo es, señora -respondió Sancho-; y aquel escudero suyo que anda, o
debe de andar, en la tal historia, a quien llaman Sancho Panza, soy yo, si
no es que me trocaron en la cuna; quiero decir, que me trocaron en la
estampa.

-De todo eso me huelgo yo mucho -dijo la duquesa-. Id, hermano Panza, y
decid a vuestro señor que él sea el bien llegado y el bien venido a mis
estados, y que ninguna cosa me pudiera venir que más contento me diera.

Sancho, con esta tan agradable respuesta, con grandísimo gusto volvió a su
amo, a quien contó todo lo que la gran señora le había dicho, levantando
con sus rústicos términos a los cielos su mucha fermosura, su gran donaire
y cortesía. Don Quijote se gallardeó en la silla, púsose bien en los
estribos, acomodóse la visera, arremetió a Rocinante, y con gentil denuedo
fue a besar las manos a la duquesa; la cual, haciendo llamar al duque, su
marido, le contó, en tanto que don Quijote llegaba, toda la embajada suya;
y los dos, por haber leído la primera parte desta historia y haber
entendido por ella el disparatado humor de don Quijote, con grandísimo
gusto y con deseo de conocerle le atendían, con prosupuesto de seguirle el
humor y conceder con él en cuanto les dijese, tratándole como a caballero
andante los días que con ellos se detuviese, con todas las ceremonias
acostumbradas en los libros de caballerías, que ellos habían leído, y aun
les eran muy aficionados.

En esto, llegó don Quijote, alzada la visera; y, dando muestras de apearse,
acudió Sancho a tenerle el estribo; pero fue tan desgraciado que, al
apearse del rucio, se le asió un pie en una soga del albarda, de tal modo
que no fue posible desenredarle, antes quedó colgado dél, con la boca y los
pechos en el suelo. Don Quijote, que no tenía en costumbre apearse sin que
le tuviesen el estribo, pensando que ya Sancho había llegado a tenérsele,
descargó de golpe el cuerpo, y llevóse tras sí la silla de Rocinante, que
debía de estar mal cinchado, y la silla y él vinieron al suelo, no sin
vergüenza suya y de muchas maldiciones que entre dientes echó al desdichado
de Sancho, que aún todavía tenía el pie en la corma.

El duque mandó a sus cazadores que acudiesen al caballero y al escudero,
los cuales levantaron a don Quijote maltrecho de la caída, y, renqueando y
como pudo, fue a hincar las rodillas ante los dos señores; pero el duque no
lo consintió en ninguna manera, antes, apeándose de su caballo, fue a
abrazar a don Quijote, diciéndole:

-A mí me pesa, señor Caballero de la Triste Figura, que la primera que
vuesa merced ha hecho en mi tierra haya sido tan mala como se ha visto;
pero descuidos de escuderos suelen ser causa de otros peores sucesos.

-El que yo he tenido en veros, valeroso príncipe -respondió don Quijote-,
es imposible ser malo, aunque mi caída no parara hasta el profundo de los
abismos, pues de allí me levantara y me sacara la gloria de haberos visto.
Mi escudero, que Dios maldiga, mejor desata la lengua para decir malicias
que ata y cincha una silla para que esté firme; pero, comoquiera que yo me
halle, caído o levantado, a pie o a caballo, siempre estaré al servicio
vuestro y al de mi señora la duquesa, digna consorte vuestra, y digna
señora de la hermosura y universal princesa de la cortesía.

-¡Pasito, mi señor don Quijote de la Mancha! -dijo el duque-, que adonde
está mi señora doña Dulcinea del Toboso no es razón que se alaben otras
fermosuras.

Ya estaba a esta sazón libre Sancho Panza del lazo, y, hallándose allí
cerca, antes que su amo respondiese, dijo:

-No se puede negar, sino afirmar, que es muy hermosa mi señora Dulcinea del
Toboso, pero donde menos se piensa se levanta la liebre; que yo he oído
decir que esto que llaman naturaleza es como un alcaller que hace vasos de
barro, y el que hace un vaso hermoso también puede hacer dos, y tres y
ciento; dígolo porque mi señora la duquesa a fee que no va en zaga a mi ama
la señora Dulcinea del Toboso.

Volvióse don Quijote a la duquesa y dijo:

-Vuestra grandeza imagine que no tuvo caballero andante en el mundo
escudero más hablador ni más gracioso del que yo tengo, y él me sacará
verdadero si algunos días quisiere vuestra gran celsitud servirse de mí.

A lo que respondió la duquesa:

-De que Sancho el bueno sea gracioso lo estimo yo en mucho, porque es señal
que es discreto; que las gracias y los donaires, señor don Quijote, como
vuesa merced bien sabe, no asientan sobre ingenios torpes; y, pues el buen
Sancho es gracioso y donairoso, desde aquí le confirmo por discreto.

-Y hablador -añadió don Quijote.

-Tanto que mejor -dijo el duque-, porque muchas gracias no se pueden decir
con pocas palabras. Y, porque no se nos vaya el tiempo en ellas, venga el
gran Caballero de la Triste Figura...

-De los Leones ha de decir vuestra alteza -dijo Sancho-, que ya no hay
Triste Figura, ni figuro.

-Sea el de los Leones -prosiguió el duque-. Digo que venga el señor
Caballero de los Leones a un castillo mío que está aquí cerca, donde se le
hará el acogimiento que a tan alta persona se debe justamente, y el que yo
y la duquesa solemos hacer a todos los caballeros andantes que a él llegan.

Ya en esto, Sancho había aderezado y cinchado bien la silla a Rocinante; y,
subiendo en él don Quijote, y el duque en un hermoso caballo, pusieron a la
duquesa en medio y encaminaron al castillo. Mandó la duquesa a Sancho que
fuese junto a ella, porque gustaba infinito de oír sus discreciones. No se
hizo de rogar Sancho, y entretejióse entre los tres, y hizo cuarto en la
conversación, con gran gusto de la duquesa y del duque, que tuvieron a gran
ventura acoger en su castillo tal caballero andante y tal escudero andado.





Capítulo XXXI. Que trata de muchas y grandes cosas


Suma era la alegría que llevaba consigo Sancho, viéndose, a su parecer, en
privanza con la duquesa, porque se le figuraba que había de hallar en su
castillo lo que en la casa de don Diego y en la de Basilio, siempre
aficionado a la buena vida; y así, tomaba la ocasión por la melena en esto
del regalarse cada y cuando que se le ofrecía.

Cuenta, pues, la historia, que antes que a la casa de placer o castillo
llegasen, se adelantó el duque y dio orden a todos sus criados del modo que
habían de tratar a don Quijote; el cual, como llegó con la duquesa a las
puertas del castillo, al instante salieron dél dos lacayos o palafreneros,
vestidos hasta en pies de unas ropas que llaman de levantar, de finísimo
raso carmesí, y, cogiendo a don Quijote en brazos, sin ser oído ni visto,
le dijeron:

-Vaya la vuestra grandeza a apear a mi señora la duquesa.

Don Quijote lo hizo, y hubo grandes comedimientos entre los dos sobre el
caso; pero, en efecto, venció la porfía de la duquesa, y no quiso decender
o bajar del palafrén sino en los brazos del duque, diciendo que no se
hallaba digna de dar a tan gran caballero tan inútil carga. En fin, salió
el duque a apearla; y al entrar en un gran patio, llegaron dos hermosas
doncellas y echaron sobre los hombros a don Quijote un gran manto de
finísima escarlata, y en un instante se coronaron todos los corredores del
patio de criados y criadas de aquellos señores, diciendo a grandes voces:

-¡Bien sea venido la flor y la nata de los caballeros andantes!

Y todos, o los más, derramaban pomos de aguas olorosas sobre don Quijote y
sobre los duques, de todo lo cual se admiraba don Quijote; y aquél fue el
primer día que de todo en todo conoció y creyó ser caballero andante
verdadero, y no fantástico, viéndose tratar del mesmo modo que él había
leído se trataban los tales caballeros en los pasados siglos.

Sancho, desamparando al rucio, se cosió con la duquesa y se entró en el
castillo; y, remordiéndole la conciencia de que dejaba al jumento solo, se
llegó a una reverenda dueña, que con otras a recebir a la duquesa había
salido, y con voz baja le dijo:

-Señora González, o como es su gracia de vuesa merced...

-Doña Rodríguez de Grijalba me llamo -respondió la dueña-. ¿Qué es lo que
mandáis, hermano?

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Querría que vuesa merced me la hiciese de salir a la puerta del castillo,
donde hallará un asno rucio mío; vuesa merced sea servida de mandarle
poner, o ponerle, en la caballeriza, porque el pobrecito es un poco
medroso, y no se hallará a estar solo en ninguna de las maneras.

-Si tan discreto es el amo como el mozo -respondió la dueña-, ¡medradas
estamos! Andad, hermano, mucho de enhoramala para vos y para quien acá os
trujo, y tened cuenta con vuestro jumento, que las dueñas desta casa no
estamos acostumbradas a semejantes haciendas.

-Pues en verdad -respondió Sancho- que he oído yo decir a mi señor, que es
zahorí de las historias, contando aquella de Lanzarote,

   cuando de Bretaña vino,
   que damas curaban dél,
   y dueñas del su rocino;

y que en el particular de mi asno, que no le trocara yo con el rocín del
señor Lanzarote.

-Hermano, si sois juglar -replicó la dueña-, guardad vuestras gracias para
donde lo parezcan y se os paguen, que de mi no podréis llevar sino una
higa.

-¡Aun bien -respondió Sancho- que será bien madura, pues no perderá vuesa
merced la quínola de sus años por punto menos!

-Hijo de puta -dijo la dueña, toda ya encendida en cólera-, si soy vieja o
no, a Dios daré la cuenta, que no a vos, bellaco, harto de ajos.

Y esto dijo en voz tan alta, que lo oyó la duquesa; y, volviendo y viendo a
la dueña tan alborotada y tan encarnizados los ojos, le preguntó con quién
las había.

-Aquí las he -respondió la dueña- con este buen hombre, que me ha pedido
encarecidamente que vaya a poner en la caballeriza a un asno suyo que está
a la puerta del castillo, trayéndome por ejemplo que así lo hicieron no sé
dónde, que unas damas curaron a un tal Lanzarote, y unas dueñas a su
rocino, y, sobre todo, por buen término me ha llamado vieja.

-Eso tuviera yo por afrenta -respondió la duquesa-, más que cuantas
pudieran decirme.

Y, hablando con Sancho, le dijo:

-Advertid, Sancho amigo, que doña Rodríguez es muy moza, y que aquellas
tocas más las trae por autoridad y por la usanza que por los años.

-Malos sean los que me quedan por vivir -respondió Sancho-, si lo dije por
tanto; sólo lo dije porque es tan grande el cariño que tengo a mi jumento,
que me pareció que no podía encomendarle a persona más caritativa que a la
señora doña Rodríguez.

Don Quijote, que todo lo oía, le dijo:

-¿Pláticas son éstas, Sancho, para este lugar?

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, cada uno ha de hablar de su menester dondequiera
que estuviere; aquí se me acordó del rucio, y aquí hablé dél; y si en la
caballeriza se me acordara, allí hablara.

A lo que dijo el duque:

-Sancho está muy en lo cierto, y no hay que culparle en nada; al rucio se
le dará recado a pedir de boca, y descuide Sancho, que se le tratará como a
su mesma persona.

Con estos razonamientos, gustosos a todos sino a don Quijote, llegaron a lo
alto y entraron a don Quijote en una sala adornada de telas riquísimas de
oro y de brocado; seis doncellas le desarmaron y sirvieron de pajes, todas
industriadas y advertidas del duque y de la duquesa de lo que habían de
hacer, y de cómo habían de tratar a don Quijote, para que imaginase y viese
que le trataban como caballero andante. Quedó don Quijote, después de
desarmado, en sus estrechos greguescos y en su jubón de camuza, seco, alto,
tendido, con las quijadas, que por de dentro se besaba la una con la otra;
figura que, a no tener cuenta las doncellas que le servían con disimular la
risa -que fue una de las precisas órdenes que sus señores les habían dado-,
reventaran riendo.

Pidiéronle que se dejase desnudar para una camisa, pero nunca lo consintió,
diciendo que la honestidad parecía tan bien en los caballeros andantes como
la valentía. Con todo, dijo que diesen la camisa a Sancho, y, encerrándose
con él en una cuadra donde estaba un rico lecho, se desnudó y vistió la
camisa; y, viéndose solo con Sancho, le dijo:

-Dime, truhán moderno y majadero antiguo: ¿parécete bien deshonrar y
afrentar a una dueña tan veneranda y tan digna de respeto como aquélla?
¿Tiempos eran aquéllos para acordarte del rucio, o señores son éstos para
dejar mal pasar a las bestias, tratando tan elegantemente a sus dueños? Por
quien Dios es, Sancho, que te reportes, y que no descubras la hilaza de
manera que caigan en la cuenta de que eres de villana y grosera tela
tejido. Mira, pecador de ti, que en tanto más es tenido el señor cuanto
tiene más honrados y bien nacidos criados, y que una de las ventajas
mayores que llevan los príncipes a los demás hombres es que se sirven de
criados tan buenos como ellos. ¿No adviertes, angustiado de ti, y
malaventurado de mí, que si veen que tú eres un grosero villano, o un
mentecato gracioso, pensarán que yo soy algún echacuervos, o algún
caballero de mohatra? No, no, Sancho amigo, huye, huye destos
inconvinientes, que quien tropieza en hablador y en gracioso, al primer
puntapié cae y da en truhán desgraciado. Enfrena la lengua, considera y
rumia las palabras antes que te salgan de la boca, y advierte que hemos
llegado a parte donde, con el favor de Dios y valor de mi brazo, hemos de
salir mejorados en tercio y quinto en fama y en hacienda.

Sancho le prometió con muchas veras de coserse la boca, o morderse la
lengua, antes de hablar palabra que no fuese muy a propósito y bien
considerada, como él se lo mandaba, y que descuidase acerca de lo tal, que
nunca por él se descubriría quién ellos eran.

Vistióse don Quijote, púsose su tahalí con su espada, echóse el mantón de
escarlata a cuestas, púsose una montera de raso verde que las doncellas le
dieron, y con este adorno salió a la gran sala, adonde halló a las
doncellas puestas en ala, tantas a una parte como a otra, y todas con
aderezo de darle aguamanos, la cual le dieron con muchas reverencias y
ceremonias.

Luego llegaron doce pajes con el maestresala, para llevarle a comer, que ya
los señores le aguardaban. Cogiéronle en medio, y, lleno de pompa y
majestad, le llevaron a otra sala, donde estaba puesta una rica mesa con
solos cuatro servicios. La duquesa y el duque salieron a la puerta de la
sala a recebirle, y con ellos un grave eclesiástico, destos que gobiernan
las casas de los príncipes; destos que, como no nacen príncipes, no
aciertan a enseñar cómo lo han de ser los que lo son; destos que quieren
que la grandeza de los grandes se mida con la estrecheza de sus ánimos;
destos que, queriendo mostrar a los que ellos gobiernan a ser limitados,
les hacen ser miserables; destos tales, digo que debía de ser el grave
religioso que con los duques salió a recebir a don Quijote. Hiciéronse mil
corteses comedimientos, y, finalmente, cogiendo a don Quijote en medio, se
fueron a sentar a la mesa.

Convidó el duque a don Quijote con la cabecera de la mesa, y aunque él lo
rehusó, las importunaciones del duque fueron tantas que la hubo de tomar.
El eclesiástico se sentó frontero, y el duque y la duquesa a los dos lados.

A todo estaba presente Sancho, embobado y atónito de ver la honra que a su
señor aquellos príncipes le hacían; y, viendo las muchas ceremonias y
ruegos que pasaron entre el duque y don Quijote para hacerle sentar a la
cabecera de la mesa, dijo:

-Si sus mercedes me dan licencia, les contaré un cuento que pasó en mi
pueblo acerca desto de los asientos.

Apenas hubo dicho esto Sancho, cuando don Quijote tembló, creyendo sin duda
alguna que había de decir alguna necedad. Miróle Sancho y entendióle, y
dijo:

-No tema vuesa merced, señor mío, que yo me desmande, ni que diga cosa que
no venga muy a pelo, que no se me han olvidado los consejos que poco ha
vuesa merced me dio sobre el hablar mucho o poco, o bien o mal.

-Yo no me acuerdo de nada, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-; di lo que
quisieres, como lo digas presto.

-Pues lo que quiero decir -dijo Sancho- es tan verdad, que mi señor don
Quijote, que está presente, no me dejará mentir.

-Por mí -replicó don Quijote-, miente tú, Sancho, cuanto quisieres, que yo
no te iré a la mano, pero mira lo que vas a decir.

-Tan mirado y remirado lo tengo, que a buen salvo está el que repica, como
se verá por la obra.

-Bien será -dijo don Quijote- que vuestras grandezas manden echar de aquí a
este tonto, que dirá mil patochadas.

-Por vida del duque -dijo la duquesa-, que no se ha de apartar de mí Sancho
un punto: quiérole yo mucho, porque sé que es muy discreto.

-Discretos días -dijo Sancho- viva vuestra santidad por el buen crédito que
de mí tiene, aunque en mí no lo haya. Y el cuento que quiero decir es éste:
«Convidó un hidalgo de mi pueblo, muy rico y principal, porque venía de los
Álamos de Medina del Campo, que casó con doña Mencía de Quiñones, que fue
hija de don Alonso de Marañón, caballero del hábito de Santiago, que se
ahogó en la Herradura, por quien hubo aquella pendencia años ha en nuestro
lugar, que, a lo que entiendo, mi señor don Quijote se halló en ella, de
donde salió herido Tomasillo el Travieso, el hijo de Balbastro el
herrero...» ¿No es verdad todo esto, señor nuestro amo? Dígalo, por su
vida, porque estos señores no me tengan por algún hablador mentiroso.

-Hasta ahora -dijo el eclesiástico-, más os tengo por hablador que por
mentiroso, pero de aquí adelante no sé por lo que os tendré.

-Tú das tantos testigos, Sancho, y tantas señas, que no puedo dejar de
decir que debes de decir verdad. Pasa adelante y acorta el cuento, porque
llevas camino de no acabar en dos días.

-No ha de acortar tal -dijo la duquesa-, por hacerme a mí placer; antes, le
ha de contar de la manera que le sabe, aunque no le acabe en seis días; que
si tantos fuesen, serían para mí los mejores que hubiese llevado en mi
vida.

-«Digo, pues, señores míos -prosiguió Sancho-, que este tal hidalgo, que yo
conozco como a mis manos, porque no hay de mi casa a la suya un tiro de
ballesta, convidó un labrador pobre, pero honrado.»

-Adelante, hermano -dijo a esta sazón el religioso-, que camino lleváis de
no parar con vuestro cuento hasta el otro mundo.

-A menos de la mitad pararé, si Dios fuere servido -respondió Sancho-. «Y
así, digo que, llegando el tal labrador a casa del dicho hidalgo
convidador, que buen poso haya su ánima, que ya es muerto, y por más señas
dicen que hizo una muerte de un ángel, que yo no me hallé presente, que
había ido por aquel tiempo a segar a Tembleque...»

-Por vida vuestra, hijo, que volváis presto de Tembleque, y que, sin
enterrar al hidalgo, si no queréis hacer más exequias, acabéis vuestro
cuento.

-«Es, pues, el caso -replicó Sancho- que, estando los dos para asentarse a
la mesa, que parece que ahora los veo más que nunca...»

Gran gusto recebían los duques del disgusto que mostraba tomar el buen
religioso de la dilación y pausas con que Sancho contaba su cuento, y don
Quijote se estaba consumiendo en cólera y en rabia.

-«Digo, así -dijo Sancho-, que, estando, como he dicho, los dos para
sentarse a la mesa, el labrador porfiaba con el hidalgo que tomase la
cabecera de la mesa, y el hidalgo porfiaba también que el labrador la
tomase, porque en su casa se había de hacer lo que él mandase; pero el
labrador, que presumía de cortés y bien criado, jamás quiso, hasta que el
hidalgo, mohíno, poniéndole ambas manos sobre los hombros, le hizo sentar
por fuerza, diciéndole: ''Sentaos, majagranzas, que adondequiera que yo me
siente será vuestra cabecera''.» Y éste es el cuento, y en verdad que creo
que no ha sido aquí traído fuera de propósito.

Púsose don Quijote de mil colores, que sobre lo moreno le jaspeaban y se le
parecían; los señores disimularon la risa, porque don Quijote no acabase de
correrse, habiendo entendido la malicia de Sancho; y, por mudar de plática
y hacer que Sancho no prosiguiese con otros disparates, preguntó la duquesa
a don Quijote que qué nuevas tenía de la señora Dulcinea, y que si le había
enviado aquellos días algunos presentes de gigantes o malandrines, pues no
podía dejar de haber vencido muchos. A lo que don Quijote respondió:

-Señora mía, mis desgracias, aunque tuvieron principio, nunca tendrán fin.
Gigantes he vencido, y follones y malandrines le he enviado, pero ¿adónde
la habían de hallar, si está encantada y vuelta en la más fea labradora que
imaginar se puede?

-No sé -dijo Sancho Panza-, a mí me parece la más hermosa criatura del
mundo; a lo menos, en la ligereza y en el brincar bien sé yo que no dará
ella la ventaja a un volteador; a buena fe, señora duquesa, así salta desde
el suelo sobre una borrica como si fuera un gato.

-¿Habéisla visto vos encantada, Sancho? -preguntó el duque.

-Y ¡cómo si la he visto! -respondió Sancho-. Pues, ¿quién diablos sino yo
fue el primero que cayó en el achaque del encantorio? ¡Tan encantada está
como mi padre!

El eclesiástico, que oyó decir de gigantes, de follones y de encantos, cayó
en la cuenta de que aquél debía de ser don Quijote de la Mancha, cuya
historia leía el duque de ordinario, y él se lo había reprehendido muchas
veces, diciéndole que era disparate leer tales disparates; y, enterándose
ser verdad lo que sospechaba, con mucha cólera, hablando con el duque, le
dijo:

-Vuestra Excelencia, señor mío, tiene que dar cuenta a Nuestro Señor de lo
que hace este buen hombre. Este don Quijote, o don Tonto, o como se llama,
imagino yo que no debe de ser tan mentecato como Vuestra Excelencia quiere
que sea, dándole ocasiones a la mano para que lleve adelante sus sandeces y
vaciedades.

Y, volviendo la plática a don Quijote, le dijo:

-Y a vos, alma de cántaro, ¿quién os ha encajado en el celebro que sois
caballero andante y que vencéis gigantes y prendéis malandrines? Andad en
hora buena, y en tal se os diga: volveos a vuestra casa, y criad vuestros
hijos, si los tenéis, y curad de vuestra hacienda, y dejad de andar vagando
por el mundo, papando viento y dando que reír a cuantos os conocen y no
conocen. ¿En dónde, nora tal, habéis vos hallado que hubo ni hay ahora
caballeros andantes? ¿Dónde hay gigantes en España, o malandrines en la
Mancha, ni Dulcineas encantadas, ni toda la caterva de las simplicidades
que de vos se cuentan?

Atento estuvo don Quijote a las razones de aquel venerable varón, y, viendo
que ya callaba, sin guardar respeto a los duques, con semblante airado y
alborotado rostro, se puso en pie y dijo...

Pero esta respuesta capítulo por sí merece.





Capítulo XXXII. De la respuesta que dio don Quijote a su reprehensor, con
otros graves y graciosos sucesos


Levantado, pues, en pie don Quijote, temblando de los pies a la cabeza como
azogado, con presurosa y turbada lengua, dijo:

-El lugar donde estoy, y la presencia ante quien me hallo y el respeto que
siempre tuve y tengo al estado que vuesa merced profesa tienen y atan las
manos de mi justo enojo; y, así por lo que he dicho como por saber que
saben todos que las armas de los togados son las mesmas que las de la
mujer, que son la lengua, entraré con la mía en igual batalla con vuesa
merced, de quien se debía esperar antes buenos consejos que infames
vituperios. Las reprehensiones santas y bien intencionadas otras
circunstancias requieren y otros puntos piden: a lo menos, el haberme
reprehendido en público y tan ásperamente ha pasado todos los límites de la
buena reprehensión, pues las primeras mejor asientan sobre la blandura que
sobre la aspereza, y no es bien que, sin tener conocimiento del pecado que
se reprehende, llamar al pecador, sin más ni más, mentecato y tonto. Si no,
dígame vuesa merced: ¿por cuál de las mentecaterías que en mí ha visto me
condena y vitupera, y me manda que me vaya a mi casa a tener cuenta en el
gobierno della y de mi mujer y de mis hijos, sin saber si la tengo o los
tengo? ¿No hay más sino a troche moche entrarse por las casas ajenas a
gobernar sus dueños, y, habiéndose criado algunos en la estrecheza de algún
pupilaje, sin haber visto más mundo que el que puede contenerse en veinte o
treinta leguas de distrito, meterse de rondón a dar leyes a la caballería y
a juzgar de los caballeros andantes? ¿Por ventura es asumpto vano o es
tiempo mal gastado el que se gasta en vagar por el mundo, no buscando los
regalos dél, sino las asperezas por donde los buenos suben al asiento de la
inmortalidad? Si me tuvieran por tonto los caballeros, los magníficos, los
generosos, los altamente nacidos, tuviéralo por afrenta inreparable; pero
de que me tengan por sandio los estudiantes, que nunca entraron ni pisaron
las sendas de la caballería, no se me da un ardite: caballero soy y
caballero he de morir si place al Altísimo. Unos van por el ancho campo de
la ambición soberbia; otros, por el de la adulación servil y baja; otros,
por el de la hipocresía engañosa, y algunos, por el de la verdadera
religión; pero yo, inclinado de mi estrella, voy por la angosta senda de la
caballería andante, por cuyo ejercicio desprecio la hacienda, pero no la
honra. Yo he satisfecho agravios, enderezado tuertos, castigado
insolencias, vencido gigantes y atropellado vestiglos; yo soy enamorado, no
más de porque es forzoso que los caballeros andantes lo sean; y, siéndolo,
no soy de los enamorados viciosos, sino de los platónicos continentes. Mis
intenciones siempre las enderezo a buenos fines, que son de hacer bien a
todos y mal a ninguno; si el que esto entiende, si el que esto obra, si el
que desto trata merece ser llamado bobo, díganlo vuestras grandezas, duque
y duquesa excelentes.

-¡Bien, por Dios! -dijo Sancho-. No diga más vuestra merced, señor y amo
mío, en su abono, porque no hay más que decir, ni más que pensar, ni más
que perseverar en el mundo. Y más, que, negando este señor, como ha negado,
que no ha habido en el mundo, ni los hay, caballeros andantes, ¿qué mucho
que no sepa ninguna de las cosas que ha dicho?

-¿Por ventura -dijo el eclesiástico- sois vos, hermano, aquel Sancho Panza
que dicen, a quien vuestro amo tiene prometida una ínsula?

-Sí soy -respondió Sancho-; y soy quien la merece tan bien como otro
cualquiera; soy quien "júntate a los buenos y serás uno dellos", y soy yo
de aquellos "no con quien naces, sino con quien paces", y de los "quien a
buen árbol se arrima, buena sombra le cobija". Yo me he arrimado a buen
señor, y ha muchos meses que ando en su compañía, y he de ser otro como él,
Dios queriendo; y viva él y viva yo: que ni a él le faltarán imperios que
mandar ni a mí ínsulas que gobernar.

-No, por cierto, Sancho amigo -dijo a esta sazón el duque-, que yo, en
nombre del señor don Quijote, os mando el gobierno de una que tengo de
nones, de no pequeña calidad.

-Híncate de rodillas, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, y besa los pies a Su
Excelencia por la merced que te ha hecho.

Hízolo así Sancho; lo cual visto por el eclesiástico, se levantó de la
mesa, mohíno además, diciendo:

-Por el hábito que tengo, que estoy por decir que es tan sandio Vuestra
Excelencia como estos pecadores. ¡Mirad si no han de ser ellos locos, pues
los cuerdos canonizan sus locuras! Quédese Vuestra Excelencia con ellos;
que, en tanto que estuvieren en casa, me estaré yo en la mía, y me escusaré
de reprehender lo que no puedo remediar.

Y, sin decir más ni comer más, se fue, sin que fuesen parte a detenerle los
ruegos de los duques; aunque el duque no le dijo mucho, impedido de la risa
que su impertinente cólera le había causado. Acabó de reír y dijo a don
Quijote:

-Vuesa merced, señor Caballero de los Leones, ha respondido por sí tan
altamente que no le queda cosa por satisfacer deste que, aunque parece
agravio, no lo es en ninguna manera; porque, así como no agravian las
mujeres, no agravian los eclesiásticos, como vuesa merced mejor sabe.

-Así es -respondió don Quijote-, y la causa es que el que no puede ser
agraviado no puede agraviar a nadie. Las mujeres, los niños y los
eclesiásticos, como no pueden defenderse, aunque sean ofendidos, no pueden
ser afrentados; porque entre el agravio y la afrenta hay esta diferencia,
como mejor Vuestra Excelencia sabe: la afrenta viene de parte de quien la
puede hacer, y la hace y la sustenta; el agravio puede venir de cualquier
parte, sin que afrente. Sea ejemplo: está uno en la calle descuidado,
llegan diez con mano armada, y, dándole de palos, pone mano a la espada y
hace su deber, pero la muchedumbre de los contrarios se le opone, y no le
deja salir con su intención, que es de vengarse; este tal queda agraviado,
pero no afrentado. Y lo mesmo confirmará otro ejemplo: está uno vuelto de
espaldas, llega otro y dale de palos, y en dándoselos huye y no espera, y
el otro le sigue y no alcanza; este que recibió los palos, recibió agravio,
mas no afrenta, porque la afrenta ha de ser sustentada. Si el que le dio
los palos, aunque se los dio a hurtacordel, pusiera mano a su espada y se
estuviera quedo, haciendo rostro a su enemigo, quedara el apaleado
agraviado y afrentado juntamente: agraviado, porque le dieron a traición;
afrentado, porque el que le dio sustentó lo que había hecho, sin volver las
espaldas y a pie quedo. Y así, según las leyes del maldito duelo, yo puedo
estar agraviado, mas no afrentado; porque los niños no sienten, ni las
mujeres, ni pueden huir, ni tienen para qué esperar, y lo mesmo los
constituidos en la sacra religión, porque estos tres géneros de gente
carecen de armas ofensivas y defensivas; y así, aunque naturalmente estén
obligados a defenderse, no lo están para ofender a nadie. Y, aunque poco ha
dije que yo podía estar agraviado, agora digo que no, en ninguna manera,
porque quien no puede recebir afrenta, menos la puede dar; por las cuales
razones yo no debo sentir, ni siento, las que aquel buen hombre me ha
dicho; sólo quisiera que esperara algún poco, para darle a entender en el
error en que está en pensar y decir que no ha habido, ni los hay,
caballeros andantes en el mundo; que si lo tal oyera Amadís, o uno de los
infinitos de su linaje, yo sé que no le fuera bien a su merced.

-Eso juro yo bien -dijo Sancho-: cuchillada le hubieran dado que le
abrieran de arriba abajo como una granada, o como a un melón muy maduro.
¡Bonitos eran ellos para sufrir semejantes cosquillas! Para mi santiguada,
que tengo por cierto que si Reinaldos de Montalbán hubiera oído estas
razones al hombrecito, tapaboca le hubiera dado que no hablara más en tres
años. ¡No, sino tomárase con ellos y viera cómo escapaba de sus manos!

Perecía de risa la duquesa en oyendo hablar a Sancho, y en su opinión le
tenía por más gracioso y por más loco que a su amo; y muchos hubo en aquel
tiempo que fueron deste mismo parecer. Finalmente, don Quijote se sosegó, y
la comida se acabó, y, en levantando los manteles, llegaron cuatro
doncellas, la una con una fuente de plata, y la otra con un aguamanil,
asimismo de plata, y la otra con dos blanquísimas y riquísimas toallas al
hombro, y la cuarta descubiertos los brazos hasta la mitad, y en sus
blancas manos -que sin duda eran blancas- una redonda pella de jabón
napolitano. Llegó la de la fuente, y con gentil donaire y desenvoltura
encajó la fuente debajo de la barba de don Quijote; el cual, sin hablar
palabra, admirado de semejante ceremonia, creyendo que debía ser usanza de
aquella tierra en lugar de las manos lavar las barbas, y así tendió la suya
todo cuanto pudo, y al mismo punto comenzó a llover el aguamanil, y la
doncella del jabón le manoseó las barbas con mucha priesa, levantando copos
de nieve, que no eran menos blancas las jabonaduras, no sólo por las
barbas, mas por todo el rostro y por los ojos del obediente caballero,
tanto, que se los hicieron cerrar por fuerza.

El duque y la duquesa, que de nada desto eran sabidores, estaban esperando
en qué había de parar tan extraordinario lavatorio. La doncella barbera,
cuando le tuvo con un palmo de jabonadura, fingió que se le había acabado
el agua, y mandó a la del aguamanil fuese por ella, que el señor don
Quijote esperaría. Hízolo así, y quedó don Quijote con la más estraña
figura y más para hacer reír que se pudiera imaginar.

Mirábanle todos los que presentes estaban, que eran muchos, y como le veían
con media vara de cuello, más que medianamente moreno, los ojos cerrados y
las barbas llenas de jabón, fue gran maravilla y mucha discreción poder
disimular la risa; las doncellas de la burla tenían los ojos bajos, sin
osar mirar a sus señores; a ellos les retozaba la cólera y la risa en el
cuerpo, y no sabían a qué acudir: o a castigar el atrevimiento de las
muchachas, o darles premio por el gusto que recibían de ver a don Quijote
de aquella suerte.

Finalmente, la doncella del aguamanil vino, y acabaron de lavar a don
Quijote, y luego la que traía las toallas le limpió y le enjugó muy
reposadamente; y, haciéndole todas cuatro a la par una grande y profunda
inclinación y reverencia, se querían ir; pero el duque, porque don Quijote
no cayese en la burla, llamó a la doncella de la fuente, diciéndole:

-Venid y lavadme a mí, y mirad que no se os acabe el agua.

La muchacha, aguda y diligente, llegó y puso la fuente al duque como a don
Quijote, y, dándose prisa, le lavaron y jabonaron muy bien, y, dejándole
enjuto y limpio, haciendo reverencias se fueron. Después se supo que había
jurado el duque que si a él no le lavaran como a don Quijote, había de
castigar su desenvoltura, lo cual habían enmendado discretamente con
haberle a él jabonado.

Estaba atento Sancho a las ceremonias de aquel lavatorio, y dijo entre sí:

-¡Válame Dios! ¿Si será también usanza en esta tierra lavar las barbas a
los escuderos como a los caballeros? Porque, en Dios y en mi ánima que lo
he bien menester, y aun que si me las rapasen a navaja, lo tendría a más
beneficio.

-¿Qué decís entre vos, Sancho? -preguntó la duquesa.

-Digo, señora -respondió él-, que en las cortes de los otros príncipes
siempre he oído decir que en levantando los manteles dan agua a las manos,
pero no lejía a las barbas; y que por eso es bueno vivir mucho, por ver
mucho; aunque también dicen que el que larga vida vive mucho mal ha de
pasar, puesto que pasar por un lavatorio de éstos antes es gusto que
trabajo.

-No tengáis pena, amigo Sancho -dijo la duquesa-, que yo haré que mis
doncellas os laven, y aun os metan en colada, si fuere menester.

-Con las barbas me contento -respondió Sancho-, por ahora a lo menos, que
andando el tiempo, Dios dijo lo que será.

-Mirad, maestresala -dijo la duquesa-, lo que el buen Sancho pide, y
cumplidle su voluntad al pie de la letra.

El maestresala respondió que en todo sería servido el señor Sancho, y con
esto se fue a comer, y llevó consigo a Sancho, quedándose a la mesa los
duques y don Quijote, hablando en muchas y diversas cosas; pero todas
tocantes al ejercicio de las armas y de la andante caballería.

La duquesa rogó a don Quijote que le delinease y describiese, pues parecía
tener felice memoria, la hermosura y facciones de la señora Dulcinea del
Toboso; que, según lo que la fama pregonaba de su belleza, tenía por
entendido que debía de ser la más bella criatura del orbe, y aun de toda la
Mancha. Sospiró don Quijote, oyendo lo que la duquesa le mandaba, y dijo:

-Si yo pudiera sacar mi corazón y ponerle ante los ojos de vuestra
grandeza, aquí, sobre esta mesa y en un plato, quitara el trabajo a mi
lengua de decir lo que apenas se puede pensar, porque Vuestra Excelencia la
viera en él toda retratada; pero, ¿para qué es ponerme yo ahora a delinear
y describir punto por punto y parte por parte la hermosura de la sin par
Dulcinea, siendo carga digna de otros hombros que de los míos, empresa en
quien se debían ocupar los pinceles de Parrasio, de Timantes y de Apeles, y
los buriles de Lisipo, para pintarla y grabarla en tablas, en mármoles y en
bronces, y la retórica ciceroniana y demostina para alabarla?

-¿Qué quiere decir demostina, señor don Quijote -preguntó la duquesa-, que
es vocablo que no le he oído en todos los días de mi vida?

-Retórica demostina -respondió don Quijote- es lo mismo que decir retórica
de Demóstenes, como ciceroniana, de Cicerón, que fueron los dos mayores
retóricos del mundo.

-Así es -dijo el duque-, y habéis andado deslumbrada en la tal pregunta.
Pero, con todo eso, nos daría gran gusto el señor don Quijote si nos la
pintase; que a buen seguro que, aunque sea en rasguño y bosquejo, que ella
salga tal, que la tengan invidia las más hermosas.

-Sí hiciera, por cierto -respondió don Quijote-, si no me la hubiera
borrado de la idea la desgracia que poco ha que le sucedió, que es tal, que
más estoy para llorarla que para describirla; porque habrán de saber
vuestras grandezas que, yendo los días pasados a besarle las manos, y a
recebir su bendición, beneplácito y licencia para esta tercera salida,
hallé otra de la que buscaba: halléla encantada y convertida de princesa en
labradora, de hermosa en fea, de ángel en diablo, de olorosa en pestífera,
de bien hablada en rústica, de reposada en brincadora, de luz en tinieblas,
y, finalmente, de Dulcinea del Toboso en una villana de Sayago.

-¡Válame Dios! -dando una gran voz, dijo a este instante el duque-. ¿Quién
ha sido el que tanto mal ha hecho al mundo? ¿Quién ha quitado dél la
belleza que le alegraba, el donaire que le entretenía y la honestidad que
le acreditaba?

-¿Quién? -respondió don Quijote-. ¿Quién puede ser sino algún maligno
encantador de los muchos invidiosos que me persiguen? Esta raza maldita,
nacida en el mundo para escurecer y aniquilar las hazañas de los buenos, y
para dar luz y levantar los fechos de los malos. Perseguido me han
encantadores, encantadores me persiguen y encantadores me persiguirán hasta
dar conmigo y con mis altas caballerías en el profundo abismo del olvido; y
en aquella parte me dañan y hieren donde veen que más lo siento, porque
quitarle a un caballero andante su dama es quitarle los ojos con que mira,
y el sol con que se alumbra, y el sustento con que se mantiene. Otras
muchas veces lo he dicho, y ahora lo vuelvo a decir: que el caballero
andante sin dama es como el árbol sin hojas, el edificio sin cimiento y la
sombra sin cuerpo de quien se cause.

-No hay más que decir -dijo la duquesa-; pero si, con todo eso, hemos de
dar crédito a la historia que del señor don Quijote de pocos días a esta
parte ha salido a la luz del mundo, con general aplauso de las gentes,
della se colige, si mal no me acuerdo, que nunca vuesa merced ha visto a la
señora Dulcinea, y que esta tal señora no es en el mundo, sino que es dama
fantástica, que vuesa merced la engendró y parió en su entendimiento, y la
pintó con todas aquellas gracias y perfeciones que quiso.

-En eso hay mucho que decir -respondió don Quijote-. Dios sabe si hay
Dulcinea o no en el mundo, o si es fantástica o no es fantástica; y éstas
no son de las cosas cuya averiguación se ha de llevar hasta el cabo. Ni yo
engendré ni parí a mi señora, puesto que la contemplo como conviene que sea
una dama que contenga en sí las partes que puedan hacerla famosa en todas
las del mundo, como son: hermosa, sin tacha, grave sin soberbia, amorosa
con honestidad, agradecida por cortés, cortés por bien criada, y,
finalmente, alta por linaje, a causa que sobre la buena sangre resplandece
y campea la hermosura con más grados de perfeción que en las hermosas
humildemente nacidas.

-Así es -dijo el duque-; pero hame de dar licencia el señor don Quijote
para que diga lo que me fuerza a decir la historia que de sus hazañas he
leído, de donde se infiere que, puesto que se conceda que hay Dulcinea, en
el Toboso o fuera dél, y que sea hermosa en el sumo grado que vuesa merced
nos la pinta, en lo de la alteza del linaje no corre parejas con las
Orianas, con las Alastrajareas, con las Madásimas, ni con otras deste jaez,
de quien están llenas las historias que vuesa merced bien sabe.

-A eso puedo decir -respondió don Quijote- que Dulcinea es hija de sus
obras, y que las virtudes adoban la sangre, y que en más se ha de estimar y
tener un humilde virtuoso que un vicioso levantado; cuanto más, que
Dulcinea tiene un jirón que la puede llevar a ser reina de corona y ceptro;
que el merecimiento de una mujer hermosa y virtuosa a hacer mayores
milagros se estiende, y, aunque no formalmente, virtualmente tiene en sí
encerradas mayores venturas.

-Digo, señor don Quijote -dijo la duquesa-, que en todo cuanto vuestra
merced dice va con pie de plomo, y, como suele decirse, con la sonda en la
mano; y que yo desde aquí adelante creeré y haré creer a todos los de mi
casa, y aun al duque mi señor, si fuere menester, que hay Dulcinea en el
Toboso, y que vive hoy día, y es hermosa, y principalmente nacida y
merecedora que un tal caballero como es el señor don Quijote la sirva; que
es lo más que puedo ni sé encarecer. Pero no puedo dejar de formar un
escrúpulo, y tener algún no sé qué de ojeriza contra Sancho Panza: el
escrúpulo es que dice la historia referida que el tal Sancho Panza halló a
la tal señora Dulcinea, cuando de parte de vuestra merced le llevó una
epístola, ahechando un costal de trigo, y, por más señas, dice que era
rubión: cosa que me hace dudar en la alteza de su linaje.

A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Señora mía, sabrá la vuestra grandeza que todas o las más cosas que a mí
me suceden van fuera de los términos ordinarios de las que a los otros
caballeros andantes acontecen, o ya sean encaminadas por el querer
inescrutable de los hados, o ya vengan encaminadas por la malicia de algún
encantador invidioso; y, como es cosa ya averiguada que todos o los más
caballeros andantes y famosos, uno tenga gracia de no poder ser encantado,
otro de ser de tan impenetrables carnes que no pueda ser herido, como lo
fue el famoso Roldán, uno de los doce Pares de Francia, de quien se cuenta
que no podía ser ferido sino por la planta del pie izquierdo, y que esto
había de ser con la punta de un alfiler gordo, y no con otra suerte de arma
alguna; y así, cuando Bernardo del Carpio le mató en Roncesvalles, viendo
que no le podía llagar con fierro, le levantó del suelo entre los brazos y
le ahogó, acordándose entonces de la muerte que dio Hércules a Anteón,
aquel feroz gigante que decían ser hijo de la Tierra. Quiero inferir de lo
dicho, que podría ser que yo tuviese alguna gracia déstas, no del no
poder ser ferido, porque muchas veces la experiencia me ha mostrado que soy
de carnes blandas y no nada impenetrables, ni la de no poder ser encantado,
que ya me he visto metido en una jaula, donde todo el mundo no fuera
poderoso a encerrarme, si no fuera a fuerzas de encantamentos; pero, pues
de aquél me libré, quiero creer que no ha de haber otro alguno que me
empezca; y así, viendo estos encantadores que con mi persona no pueden usar
de sus malas mañas, vénganse en las cosas que más quiero, y quieren
quitarme la vida maltratando la de Dulcinea, por quien yo vivo; y así, creo
que, cuando mi escudero le llevó mi embajada, se la convirtieron en villana
y ocupada en tan bajo ejercicio como es el de ahechar trigo; pero ya tengo
yo dicho que aquel trigo ni era rubión ni trigo, sino granos de perlas
orientales; y para prueba desta verdad quiero decir a vuestras magnitudes
cómo, viniendo poco ha por el Toboso, jamás pude hallar los palacios de
Dulcinea; y que otro día, habiéndola visto Sancho, mi escudero, en su mesma
figura, que es la más bella del orbe, a mí me pareció una labradora tosca y
fea, y no nada bien razonada, siendo la discreción del mundo; y, pues yo no
estoy encantado, ni lo puedo estar, según buen discurso, ella es la
encantada, la ofendida y la mudada, trocada y trastrocada, y en ella se han
vengado de mí mis enemigos, y por ella viviré yo en perpetuas lágrimas,
hasta verla en su prístino estado. Todo esto he dicho para que nadie repare
en lo que Sancho dijo del cernido ni del ahecho de Dulcinea; que, pues a mí
me la mudaron, no es maravilla que a él se la cambiasen. Dulcinea es
principal y bien nacida, y de los hidalgos linajes que hay en el Toboso,
que son muchos, antiguos y muy buenos, a buen seguro que no le cabe poca
parte a la sin par Dulcinea, por quien su lugar será famoso y nombrado en
los venideros siglos, como lo ha sido Troya por Elena, y España por la
Cava, aunque con mejor título y fama. Por otra parte, quiero que entiendan
vuestras señorías que Sancho Panza es uno de los más graciosos escuderos
que jamás sirvió a caballero andante; tiene a veces unas simplicidades tan
agudas, que el pensar si es simple o agudo causa no pequeño contento; tiene
malicias que le condenan por bellaco, y descuidos que le confirman por
bobo; duda de todo y créelo todo; cuando pienso que se va a despeñar de
tonto, sale con unas discreciones, que le levantan al cielo. Finalmente, yo
no le trocaría con otro escudero, aunque me diesen de añadidura una ciudad;
y así, estoy en duda si será bien enviarle al gobierno de quien vuestra
grandeza le ha hecho merced; aunque veo en él una cierta aptitud para esto
de gobernar, que atusándole tantico el entendimiento, se saldría con
cualquiera gobierno, como el rey con sus alcabalas; y más, que ya por
muchas experiencias sabemos que no es menester ni mucha habilidad ni muchas
letras para ser uno gobernador, pues hay por ahí ciento que apenas saber
leer, y gobiernan como unos girifaltes; el toque está en que tengan buena
intención y deseen acertar en todo; que nunca les faltará quien les
aconseje y encamine en lo que han de hacer, como los gobernadores
caballeros y no letrados, que sentencian con asesor. Aconsejaríale yo que
ni tome cohecho, ni pierda derecho, y otras cosillas que me quedan en el
estómago, que saldrán a su tiempo, para utilidad de Sancho y provecho de la
ínsula que gobernare.

A este punto llegaban de su coloquio el duque, la duquesa y don Quijote,
cuando oyeron muchas voces y gran rumor de gente en el palacio; y a deshora
entró Sancho en la sala, todo asustado, con un cernadero por babador, y
tras él muchos mozos, o, por mejor decir, pícaros de cocina y otra gente
menuda, y uno venía con un artesoncillo de agua, que en la color y poca
limpieza mostraba ser de fregar; seguíale y perseguíale el de la artesa, y
procuraba con toda solicitud ponérsela y encajársela debajo de las barbas,
y otro pícaro mostraba querérselas lavar.

-¿Qué es esto, hermanos? -preguntó la duquesa-. ¿Qué es esto? ¿Qué queréis
a ese buen hombre? ¿Cómo y no consideráis que está electo gobernador?

A lo que respondió el pícaro barbero:

-No quiere este señor dejarse lavar, como es usanza, y como se la lavó el
duque mi señor y el señor su amo.

-Sí quiero -respondió Sancho con mucha cólera-, pero querría que fuese con
toallas más limpias, con lejía mas clara y con manos no tan sucias; que no
hay tanta diferencia de mí a mi amo, que a él le laven con agua de ángeles
y a mí con lejía de diablos. Las usanzas de las tierras y de los palacios
de los príncipes tanto son buenas cuanto no dan pesadumbre, pero la
costumbre del lavatorio que aquí se usa peor es que de diciplinantes. Yo
estoy limpio de barbas y no tengo necesidad de semejantes refrigerios; y el
que se llegare a lavarme ni a tocarme a un pelo de la cabeza, digo, de mi
barba, hablando con el debido acatamiento, le daré tal puñada que le deje
el puño engastado en los cascos; que estas tales ceremonias y jabonaduras
más parecen burlas que gasajos de huéspedes.

Perecida de risa estaba la duquesa, viendo la cólera y oyendo las razones
de Sancho, pero no dio mucho gusto a don Quijote verle tan mal adeliñado
con la jaspeada toalla, y tan rodeado de tantos entretenidos de cocina; y
así, haciendo una profunda reverencia a los duques, como que les pedía
licencia para hablar, con voz reposada dijo a la canalla:

-¡Hola, señores caballeros! Vuesas mercedes dejen al mancebo, y vuélvanse
por donde vinieron, o por otra parte si se les antojare, que mi escudero es
limpio tanto como otro, y esas artesillas son para él estrechas y penantes
búcaros. Tomen mi consejo y déjenle, porque ni él ni yo sabemos de achaque
de burlas.

Cogióle la razón de la boca Sancho, y prosiguió diciendo:

-¡No, sino lléguense a hacer burla del mostrenco, que así lo sufriré como
ahora es de noche! Traigan aquí un peine, o lo que quisieren, y almohácenme
estas barbas, y si sacaren dellas cosa que ofenda a la limpieza, que me
trasquilen a cruces.

A esta sazón, sin dejar la risa, dijo la duquesa:

-Sancho Panza tiene razón en todo cuanto ha dicho, y la tendrá en todo
cuanto dijere: él es limpio, y, como él dice, no tiene necesidad de
lavarse; y si nuestra usanza no le contenta, su alma en su palma, cuanto
más, que vosotros, ministros de la limpieza, habéis andado demasiadamente
de remisos y descuidados, y no sé si diga atrevidos, a traer a tal
personaje y a tales barbas, en lugar de fuentes y aguamaniles de oro puro y
de alemanas toallas, artesillas y dornajos de palo y rodillas de
aparadores. Pero, en fin, sois malos y mal nacidos, y no podéis dejar, como
malandrines que sois, de mostrar la ojeriza que tenéis con los escuderos de
los andantes caballeros.

Creyeron los apicarados ministros, y aun el maestresala, que venía con
ellos, que la duquesa hablaba de veras; y así, quitaron el cernadero del
pecho de Sancho, y todos confusos y casi corridos se fueron y le dejaron;
el cual, viéndose fuera de aquel, a su parecer, sumo peligro, se fue a
hincar de rodillas ante la duquesa y dijo:

-De grandes señoras, grandes mercedes se esperan; esta que la vuestra
merced hoy me ha fecho no puede pagarse con menos, si no es con desear
verme armado caballero andante, para ocuparme todos los días de mi vida en
servir a tan alta señora. Labrador soy, Sancho Panza me llamo, casado soy,
hijos tengo y de escudero sirvo: si con alguna destas cosas puedo servir a
vuestra grandeza, menos tardaré yo en obedecer que vuestra señoría en
mandar.

-Bien parece, Sancho -respondió la duquesa-, que habéis aprendido a ser
cortés en la escuela de la misma cortesía; bien parece, quiero decir, que
os habéis criado a los pechos del señor don Quijote, que debe de ser la
nata de los comedimientos y la flor de las ceremonias, o cirimonias, como
vos decís. Bien haya tal señor y tal criado: el uno, por norte de la
andante caballería; y el otro, por estrella de la escuderil fidelidad.
Levantaos, Sancho amigo, que yo satisfaré vuestras cortesías con hacer que
el duque mi señor, lo más presto que pudiere, os cumpla la merced prometida
del gobierno.

Con esto cesó la plática, y don Quijote se fue a reposar la siesta, y la
duquesa pidió a Sancho que, si no tenía mucha gana de dormir, viniese a
pasar la tarde con ella y con sus doncellas en una muy fresca sala. Sancho
respondió que, aunque era verdad que tenía por costumbre dormir cuatro o
cinco horas las siestas del verano, que, por servir a su bondad, él
procuraría con todas sus fuerzas no dormir aquel día ninguna, y vendría
obediente a su mandado, y fuese. El duque dio nuevas órdenes como se
tratase a don Quijote como a caballero andante, sin salir un punto del
estilo como cuentan que se trataban los antiguos caballeros.





Capítulo XXXIII. De la sabrosa plática que la duquesa y sus doncellas
pasaron con Sancho Panza, digna de que se lea y de que se note


Cuenta, pues, la historia, que Sancho no durmió aquella siesta, sino que,
por cumplir su palabra, vino en comiendo a ver a la duquesa; la cual, con
el gusto que tenía de oírle, le hizo sentar junto a sí en una silla baja,
aunque Sancho, de puro bien criado, no quería sentarse; pero la duquesa le
dijo que se sentase como gobernador y hablase como escudero, puesto que por
entrambas cosas merecía el mismo escaño del Cid Ruy Díaz Campeador.

Encogió Sancho los hombros, obedeció y sentóse, y todas las doncellas y
dueñas de la duquesa la rodearon, atentas, con grandísimo silencio, a
escuchar lo que diría; pero la duquesa fue la que habló primero, diciendo:

-Ahora que estamos solos, y que aquí no nos oye nadie, querría yo que el
señor gobernador me asolviese ciertas dudas que tengo, nacidas de la
historia que del gran don Quijote anda ya impresa; una de las cuales dudas
es que, pues el buen Sancho nunca vio a Dulcinea, digo, a la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso, ni le llevó la carta del señor don Quijote, porque se
quedó en el libro de memoria en Sierra Morena, cómo se atrevió a fingir la
respuesta, y aquello de que la halló ahechando trigo, siendo todo burla y
mentira, y tan en daño de la buena opinión de la sin par Dulcinea, y todas
que no vienen bien con la calidad y fidelidad de los buenos escuderos.

A estas razones, sin responder con alguna, se levantó Sancho de la silla,
y, con pasos quedos, el cuerpo agobiado y el dedo puesto sobre los labios,
anduvo por toda la sala levantando los doseles; y luego, esto hecho, se
volvió a sentar y dijo:

-Ahora, señora mía, que he visto que no nos escucha nadie de solapa, fuera
de los circunstantes, sin temor ni sobresalto responderé a lo que se me ha
preguntado, y a todo aquello que se me preguntare; y lo primero que digo es
que yo tengo a mi señor don Quijote por loco rematado, puesto que algunas
veces dice cosas que, a mi parecer, y aun de todos aquellos que le
escuchan, son tan discretas y por tan buen carril encaminadas, que el mesmo
Satanás no las podría decir mejores; pero, con todo esto, verdaderamente y
sin escrúpulo, a mí se me ha asentado que es un mentecato. Pues, como yo
tengo esto en el magín, me atrevo a hacerle creer lo que no lleva pies ni
cabeza, como fue aquello de la respuesta de la carta, y lo de habrá seis o
ocho días, que aún no está en historia; conviene a saber: lo del encanto de
mi señora doña Dulcinea, que le he dado a entender que está encantada, no
siendo más verdad que por los cerros de Úbeda.

Rogóle la duquesa que le contase aquel encantamento o burla, y Sancho se lo
contó todo del mesmo modo que había pasado, de que no poco gusto recibieron
los oyentes; y, prosiguiendo en su plática, dijo la duquesa:

-De lo que el buen Sancho me ha contado me anda brincando un escrúpulo en
el alma y un cierto susurro llega a mis oídos, que me dice: ''Pues don
Quijote de la Mancha es loco, menguado y mentecato, y Sancho Panza su
escudero lo conoce, y, con todo eso, le sirve y le sigue y va atenido a las
vanas promesas suyas, sin duda alguna debe de ser él más loco y tonto que
su amo; y, siendo esto así, como lo es, mal contado te será, señora
duquesa, si al tal Sancho Panza le das ínsula que gobierne, porque el que
no sabe gobernarse a sí, ¿cómo sabrá gobernar a otros?''

-Par Dios, señora -dijo Sancho-, que ese escrúpulo viene con parto derecho;
pero dígale vuesa merced que hable claro, o como quisiere, que yo conozco
que dice verdad: que si yo fuera discreto, días ha que había de haber
dejado a mi amo. Pero ésta fue mi suerte, y ésta mi malandanza; no puedo
más, seguirle tengo: somos de un mismo lugar, he comido su pan, quiérole
bien, es agradecido, diome sus pollinos, y, sobre todo, yo soy fiel; y así,
es imposible que nos pueda apartar otro suceso que el de la pala y azadón.
Y si vuestra altanería no quisiere que se me dé el prometido gobierno, de
menos me hizo Dios, y podría ser que el no dármele redundase en pro de mi
conciencia; que, maguera tonto, se me entiende aquel refrán de ''por su mal
le nacieron alas a la hormiga''; y aun podría ser que se fuese más aína
Sancho escudero al cielo, que no Sancho gobernador. Tan buen pan hacen aquí
como en Francia; y de noche todos los gatos son pardos, y asaz de
desdichada es la persona que a las dos de la tarde no se ha desayunado; y
no hay estómago que sea un palmo mayor que otro, el cual se puede llenar,
como suele decirse, de paja y de heno; y las avecitas del campo tienen a
Dios por su proveedor y despensero; y más calientan cuatro varas de paño de
Cuenca que otras cuatro de límiste de Segovia; y al dejar este mundo y
meternos la tierra adentro, por tan estrecha senda va el príncipe como el
jornalero, y no ocupa más pies de tierra el cuerpo del Papa que el del
sacristán, aunque sea más alto el uno que el otro; que al entrar en el hoyo
todos nos ajustamos y encogemos, o nos hacen ajustar y encoger, mal que nos
pese y a buenas noches. Y torno a decir que si vuestra señoría no me
quisiere dar la ínsula por tonto, yo sabré no dárseme nada por discreto; y
yo he oído decir que detrás de la cruz está el diablo, y que no es oro todo
lo que reluce, y que de entre los bueyes, arados y coyundas sacaron al
labrador Wamba para ser rey de España, y de entre los brocados, pasatiempos
y riquezas sacaron a Rodrigo para ser comido de culebras, si es que las
trovas de los romances antiguos no mienten.

-Y ¡cómo que no mienten! -dijo a esta sazón doña Rodríguez la dueña, que
era una de las escuchantes-: que un romance hay que dice que metieron al
rey Rodrigo, vivo vivo, en una tumba llena de sapos, culebras y lagartos, y
que de allí a dos días dijo el rey desde dentro de la tumba, con voz
doliente y baja:

Ya me comen, ya me comen

por do más pecado había;

y, según esto, mucha razón tiene este señor en decir que quiere más ser más
labrador que rey, si le han de comer sabandijas.

No pudo la duquesa tener la risa, oyendo la simplicidad de su dueña, ni
dejó de admirarse en oír las razones y refranes de Sancho, a quien dijo:

-Ya sabe el buen Sancho que lo que una vez promete un caballero procura
cumplirlo, aunque le cueste la vida. El duque, mi señor y marido, aunque no
es de los andantes, no por eso deja de ser caballero, y así, cumplirá la
palabra de la prometida ínsula, a pesar de la invidia y de la malicia del
mundo. Esté Sancho de buen ánimo, que cuando menos lo piense se verá
sentado en la silla de su ínsula y en la de su estado, y empuñará su
gobierno, que con otro de brocado de tres altos lo deseche. Lo que yo le
encargo es que mire cómo gobierna sus vasallos, advirtiendo que todos son
leales y bien nacidos.

-Eso de gobernarlos bien -respondió Sancho- no hay para qué encargármelo,
porque yo soy caritativo de mío y tengo compasión de los pobres; y a quien
cuece y amasa, no le hurtes hogaza; y para mi santiguada que no me han de
echar dado falso; soy perro viejo, y entiendo todo tus, tus, y sé
despabilarme a sus tiempos, y no consiento que me anden musarañas ante los
ojos, porque sé dónde me aprieta el zapato: dígolo porque los buenos
tendrán conmigo mano y concavidad, y los malos, ni pie ni entrada. Y
paréceme a mí que en esto de los gobiernos todo es comenzar, y podría ser
que a quince días de gobernador me comiese las manos tras el oficio y
supiese más dél que de la labor del campo, en que me he criado.

-Vos tenéis razón razón, Sancho -dijo la duquesa-, que nadie nace enseñado,
y de los hombres se hacen los obispos, que no de las piedras. Pero,
volviendo a la plática que poco ha tratábamos del encanto de la señora
Dulcinea, tengo por cosa cierta y más que averiguada que aquella
imaginación que Sancho tuvo de burlar a su señor y darle a entender que la
labradora era Dulcinea, y que si su señor no la conocía debía de ser por
estar encantada, toda fue invención de alguno de los encantadores que al
señor don Quijote persiguen; porque real y verdaderamente yo sé de buena
parte que la villana que dio el brinco sobre la pollina era y es Dulcinea
del Toboso, y que el buen Sancho, pensando ser el engañador, es el
engañado; y no hay poner más duda en esta verdad que en las cosas que nunca
vimos; y sepa el señor Sancho Panza que también tenemos acá encantadores
que nos quieren bien, y nos dicen lo que pasa por el mundo, pura y
sencillamente, sin enredos ni máquinas; y créame Sancho que la villana
brincadora era y es Dulcinea del Toboso, que está encantada como la madre
que la parió; y cuando menos nos pensemos, la habemos de ver en su propia
figura, y entonces saldrá Sancho del engaño en que vive.

-Bien puede ser todo eso -dijo Sancho Panza-; y agora quiero creer lo que
mi amo cuenta de lo que vio en la cueva de Montesinos, donde dice que vio a
la señora Dulcinea del Toboso en el mesmo traje y hábito que yo dije que la
había visto cuando la encanté por solo mi gusto; y todo debió de ser al
revés, como vuesa merced, señora mía, dice, porque de mi ruin ingenio no se
puede ni debe presumir que fabricase en un instante tan agudo embuste, ni
creo yo que mi amo es tan loco que con tan flaca y magra persuasión como la
mía creyese una cosa tan fuera de todo término. Pero, señora, no por esto
será bien que vuestra bondad me tenga por malévolo, pues no está obligado
un porro como yo a taladrar los pensamientos y malicias de los pésimos
encantadores: yo fingí aquello por escaparme de las riñas de mi señor don
Quijote, y no con intención de ofenderle; y si ha salido al revés, Dios
está en el cielo, que juzga los corazones.

-Así es la verdad -dijo la duquesa-; pero dígame agora, Sancho, qué es esto
que dice de la cueva de Montesinos, que gustaría saberlo.

Entonces Sancho Panza le contó punto por punto lo que queda dicho acerca de
la tal aventura. Oyendo lo cual la duquesa, dijo:

-Deste suceso se puede inferir que, pues el gran don Quijote dice que vio
allí a la mesma labradora que Sancho vio a la salida del Toboso, sin duda
es Dulcinea, y que andan por aquí los encantadores muy listos y
demasiadamente curiosos.

-Eso digo yo -dijo Sancho Panza-, que si mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso está
encantada, su daño; que yo no me tengo de tomar, yo, con los enemigos de mi
amo, que deben de ser muchos y malos. Verdad sea que la que yo vi fue una
labradora, y por labradora la tuve, y por tal labradora la juzgué; y si
aquélla era Dulcinea, no ha de estar a mi cuenta, ni ha de correr por mí, o
sobre ello, morena. No, sino ándense a cada triquete conmigo a dime y
direte, "Sancho lo dijo, Sancho lo hizo, Sancho tornó y Sancho volvió",
como si Sancho fuese algún quienquiera, y no fuese el mismo Sancho Panza,
el que anda ya en libros por ese mundo adelante, según me dijo Sansón
Carrasco, que, por lo menos, es persona bachillerada por Salamanca, y los
tales no pueden mentir si no es cuando se les antoja o les viene muy a
cuento; así que, no hay para qué nadie se tome conmigo, y pues que tengo
buena fama, y, según oí decir a mi señor, que más vale el buen nombre que
las muchas riquezas, encájenme ese gobierno y verán maravillas; que quien
ha sido buen escudero será buen gobernador.

-Todo cuanto aquí ha dicho el buen Sancho -dijo la duquesa- son sentencias
catonianas, o, por lo menos, sacadas de las mesmas entrañas del mismo
Micael Verino, florentibus occidit annis. En fin, en fin, hablando a su
modo, debajo de mala capa suele haber buen bebedor.

-En verdad, señora -respondió Sancho-, que en mi vida he bebido de malicia;
con sed bien podría ser, porque no tengo nada de hipócrita: bebo cuando
tengo gana, y cuando no la tengo y cuando me lo dan, por no parecer o
melindroso o malcriado; que a un brindis de un amigo, ¿qué corazón ha de
haber tan de mármol que no haga la razón? Pero, aunque las calzo, no las
ensucio; cuanto más, que los escuderos de los caballeros andantes, casi de
ordinario beben agua, porque siempre andan por florestas, selvas y prados,
montañas y riscos, sin hallar una misericordia de vino, si dan por ella un
ojo.

-Yo lo creo así -respondió la duquesa-. Y por ahora, váyase Sancho a
reposar, que después hablaremos más largo y daremos orden como vaya presto
a encajarse, como él dice, aquel gobierno.

De nuevo le besó las manos Sancho a la duquesa, y le suplicó le hiciese
merced de que se tuviese buena cuenta con su rucio, porque era la lumbre de
sus ojos.

-¿Qué rucio es éste? -preguntó la duquesa.

-Mi asno -respondió Sancho-, que por no nombrarle con este nombre, le suelo
llamar el rucio; y a esta señora dueña le rogué, cuando entré en este
castillo, tuviese cuenta con él, y azoróse de manera como si la hubiera
dicho que era fea o vieja, debiendo ser más propio y natural de las dueñas
pensar jumentos que autorizar las salas. ¡Oh, válame Dios, y cuán mal
estaba con estas señoras un hidalgo de mi lugar!

-Sería algún villano -dijo doña Rodríguez, la dueña-, que si él fuera
hidalgo y bien nacido, él las pusiera sobre el cuerno de la luna.

-Agora bien -dijo la duquesa-, no haya más: calle doña Rodríguez y
sosiéguese el señor Panza, y quédese a mi cargo el regalo del rucio; que,
por ser alhaja de Sancho, le pondré yo sobre las niñas de mis ojos.

-En la caballeriza basta que esté -respondió Sancho-, que sobre las niñas
de los ojos de vuestra grandeza ni él ni yo somos dignos de estar sólo un
momento, y así lo consintiría yo como darme de puñaladas; que, aunque dice
mi señor que en las cortesías antes se ha de perder por carta de más que de
menos, en las jumentiles y así niñas se ha de ir con el compás en la mano y
con medido término.

-Llévele -dijo la duquesa- Sancho al gobierno, y allá le podrá regalar como
quisiere, y aun jubilarle del trabajo.

-No piense vuesa merced, señora duquesa, que ha dicho mucho -dijo Sancho-;
que yo he visto ir más de dos asnos a los gobiernos, y que llevase yo el
mío no sería cosa nueva.

Las razones de Sancho renovaron en la duquesa la risa y el contento; y,
enviándole a reposar, ella fue a dar cuenta al duque de lo que con él había
pasado, y entre los dos dieron traza y orden de hacer una burla a don
Quijote que fuese famosa y viniese bien con el estilo caballeresco, en el
cual le hicieron muchas, tan propias y discretas, que son las mejores
aventuras que en esta grande historia se contienen.





Capítulo XXXIV. Que cuenta de la noticia que se tuvo de cómo se había de
desencantar la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, que es una de las aventuras más
famosas deste libro


Grande era el gusto que recebían el duque y la duquesa de la conversación
de don Quijote y de la de Sancho Panza; y, confirmándose en la intención
que tenían de hacerles algunas burlas que llevasen vislumbres y apariencias
de aventuras, tomaron motivo de la que don Quijote ya les había contado de
la cueva de Montesinos, para hacerle una que fuese famosa (pero de lo que
más la duquesa se admiraba era que la simplicidad de Sancho fuese tanta que
hubiese venido a creer ser verdad infalible que Dulcinea del Toboso
estuviese encantada, habiendo sido él mesmo el encantador y el embustero de
aquel negocio); y así, habiendo dado orden a sus criados de todo lo que
habían de hacer, de allí a seis días le llevaron a caza de montería, con
tanto aparato de monteros y cazadores como pudiera llevar un rey coronado.
Diéronle a don Quijote un vestido de monte y a Sancho otro verde, de
finísimo paño; pero don Quijote no se le quiso poner, diciendo que otro día
había de volver al duro ejercicio de las armas y que no podía llevar
consigo guardarropas ni reposterías. Sancho sí tomó el que le dieron, con
intención de venderle en la primera ocasión que pudiese.

Llegado, pues, el esperado día, armóse don Quijote, vistióse Sancho, y,
encima de su rucio, que no le quiso dejar aunque le daban un caballo, se
metió entre la tropa de los monteros. La duquesa salió bizarramente
aderezada, y don Quijote, de puro cortés y comedido, tomó la rienda de su
palafrén, aunque el duque no quería consentirlo, y, finalmente, llegaron a
un bosque que entre dos altísimas montañas estaba, donde, tomados los
puestos, paranzas y veredas, y repartida la gente por diferentes puestos,
se comenzó la caza con grande estruendo, grita y vocería, de manera que
unos a otros no podían oírse, así por el ladrido de los perros como por el
son de las bocinas.

Apeóse la duquesa, y, con un agudo venablo en las manos, se puso en un
puesto por donde ella sabía que solían venir algunos jabalíes. Apeóse
asimismo el duque y don Quijote, y pusiéronse a sus lados; Sancho se puso
detrás de todos, sin apearse del rucio, a quien no osara desamparar, porque
no le sucediese algún desmán. Y, apenas habían sentado el pie y puesto en
ala con otros muchos criados suyos, cuando, acosado de los perros y seguido
de los cazadores, vieron que hacia ellos venía un desmesurado jabalí,
crujiendo dientes y colmillos y arrojando espuma por la boca; y en
viéndole, embrazando su escudo y puesta mano a su espada, se adelantó a
recebirle don Quijote. Lo mesmo hizo el duque con su venablo; pero a todos
se adelantara la duquesa, si el duque no se lo estorbara. Sólo Sancho, en
viendo al valiente animal, desamparó al rucio y dio a correr cuanto pudo,
y, procurando subirse sobre una alta encina, no fue posible; antes, estando
ya a la mitad dél, asido de una rama, pugnando subir a la cima, fue tan
corto de ventura y tan desgraciado, que se desgajó la rama, y, al venir al
suelo, se quedó en el aire, asido de un gancho de la encina, sin poder
llegar al suelo. Y, viéndose así, y que el sayo verde se le rasgaba, y
pareciéndole que si aquel fiero animal allí allegaba le podía alcanzar,
comenzó a dar tantos gritos y a pedir socorro con tanto ahínco, que todos
los que le oían y no le veían creyeron que estaba entre los dientes de
alguna fiera.

Finalmente, el colmilludo jabalí quedó atravesado de las cuchillas de
muchos venablos que se le pusieron delante; y, volviendo la cabeza don
Quijote a los gritos de Sancho, que ya por ellos le había conocido, viole
pendiente de la encina y la cabeza abajo, y al rucio junto a él, que no le
desamparó en su calamidad; y dice Cide Hamete que pocas veces vio a Sancho
Panza sin ver al rucio, ni al rucio sin ver a Sancho: tal era la amistad y
buena fe que entre los dos se guardaban.

Llegó don Quijote y descolgó a Sancho; el cual, viéndose libre y en el
suelo, miró lo desgarrado del sayo de monte, y pesóle en el alma; que pensó
que tenía en el vestido un mayorazgo. En esto, atravesaron al jabalí
poderoso sobre una acémila, y, cubriéndole con matas de romero y con ramas
de mirto, le llevaron, como en señal de vitoriosos despojos, a unas grandes
tiendas de campaña que en la mitad del bosque estaban puestas, donde
hallaron las mesas en orden y la comida aderezada, tan sumptuosa y grande,
que se echaba bien de ver en ella la grandeza y magnificencia de quien la
daba. Sancho, mostrando las llagas a la duquesa de su roto vestido, dijo:

-Si esta caza fuera de liebres o de pajarillos, seguro estuviera mi sayo de
verse en este estremo. Yo no sé qué gusto se recibe de esperar a un animal
que, si os alcanza con un colmillo, os puede quitar la vida; yo me acuerdo
haber oído cantar un romance antiguo que dice:

   De los osos seas comido,
   como Favila el nombrado.

-Ése fue un rey godo -dijo don Quijote-, que, yendo a caza de montería, le
comió un oso.

-Eso es lo que yo digo -respondió Sancho-: que no querría yo que los
príncipes y los reyes se pusiesen en semejantes peligros, a trueco de un
gusto que parece que no le había de ser, pues consiste en matar a un animal
que no ha cometido delito alguno.

-Antes os engañáis, Sancho -respondió el duque-, porque el ejercicio de la
caza de monte es el más conveniente y necesario para los reyes y príncipes
que otro alguno. La caza es una imagen de la guerra: hay en ella
estratagemas, astucias, insidias para vencer a su salvo al enemigo;
padécense en ella fríos grandísimos y calores intolerables; menoscábase el
ocio y el sueño, corrobóranse las fuerzas, agilítanse los miembros del que
la usa, y, en resolución, es ejercicio que se puede hacer sin perjuicio de
nadie y con gusto de muchos; y lo mejor que él tiene es que no es para
todos, como lo es el de los otros géneros de caza, excepto el de la
volatería, que también es sólo para reyes y grandes señores. Así que, ¡oh
Sancho!, mudad de opinión, y, cuando seáis gobernador, ocupaos en la caza y
veréis como os vale un pan por ciento.

-Eso no -respondió Sancho-: el buen gobernador, la pierna quebrada y en
casa. ¡Bueno sería que viniesen los negociantes a buscarle fatigados y él
estuviese en el monte holgándose! ¡Así enhoramala andaría el gobierno! Mía
fe, señor, la caza y los pasatiempos más han de ser para los holgazanes que
para los gobernadores. En lo que yo pienso entretenerme es en jugar al
triunfo envidado las pascuas, y a los bolos los domingos y fiestas; que
esas cazas ni cazos no dicen con mi condición ni hacen con mi conciencia.

-Plega a Dios, Sancho, que así sea, porque del dicho al hecho hay gran
trecho.

-Haya lo que hubiere -replicó Sancho-, que al buen pagador no le duelen
prendas, y más vale al que Dios ayuda que al que mucho madruga, y tripas
llevan pies, que no pies a tripas; quiero decir que si Dios me ayuda, y yo
hago lo que debo con buena intención, sin duda que gobernaré mejor que un
gerifalte. ¡No, sino pónganme el dedo en la boca y verán si aprieto o no!

-¡Maldito seas de Dios y de todos sus santos, Sancho maldito -dijo don
Quijote-, y cuándo será el día, como otras muchas veces he dicho, donde yo
te vea hablar sin refranes una razón corriente y concertada! Vuestras
grandezas dejen a este tonto, señores míos, que les molerá las almas, no
sólo puestas entre dos, sino entre dos mil refranes, traídos tan a sazón y
tan a tiempo cuanto le dé Dios a él la salud, o a mí si los querría
escuchar.

-Los refranes de Sancho Panza -dijo la duquesa-, puesto que son más que los
del Comendador Griego, no por eso son en menos de estimar, por la brevedad
de las sentencias. De mí sé decir que me dan más gusto que otros, aunque
sean mejor traídos y con más sazón acomodados.

Con estos y otros entretenidos razonamientos, salieron de la tienda al
bosque, y en requerir algunas paranzas, y presto, se les pasó el día y se
les vino la noche, y no tan clara ni tan sesga como la sazón del tiempo
pedía, que era en la mitad del verano; pero un cierto claroescuro que trujo
consigo ayudó mucho a la intención de los duques; y, así como comenzó a
anochecer, un poco más adelante del crepúsculo, a deshora pareció que todo
el bosque por todas cuatro partes se ardía, y luego se oyeron por aquí y
por allí, y por acá y por acullá, infinitas cornetas y otros instrumentos
de guerra, como de muchas tropas de caballería que por el bosque pasaba. La
luz del fuego, el son de los bélicos instrumentos, casi cegaron y atronaron
los ojos y los oídos de los circunstantes, y aun de todos los que en el
bosque estaban. Luego se oyeron infinitos lelilíes, al uso de moros cuando
entran en las batallas, sonaron trompetas y clarines, retumbaron tambores,
resonaron pífaros, casi todos a un tiempo, tan contino y tan apriesa, que
no tuviera sentido el que no quedara sin él al son confuso de tantos
intrumentos. Pasmóse el duque, suspendióse la duquesa, admiróse don
Quijote, tembló Sancho Panza, y, finalmente, aun hasta los mesmos sabidores
de la causa se espantaron. Con el temor les cogió el silencio, y un
postillón que en traje de demonio les pasó por delante, tocando en voz de
corneta un hueco y desmesurado cuerno, que un ronco y espantoso son
despedía.

-¡Hola, hermano correo! -dijo el duque-, ¿quién sois, adónde vais, y qué
gente de guerra es la que por este bosque parece que atraviesa?

A lo que respondió el correo con voz horrísona y desenfadada:

-Yo soy el Diablo; voy a buscar a don Quijote de la Mancha; la gente que
por aquí viene son seis tropas de encantadores, que sobre un carro
triunfante traen a la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso. Encantada viene con el
gallardo francés Montesinos, a dar orden a don Quijote de cómo ha de ser
desencantada la tal señora.

-Si vos fuérades diablo, como decís y como vuestra figura muestra, ya
hubiérades conocido al tal caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, pues le
tenéis delante.

-En Dios y en mi conciencia -respondió el Diablo- que no miraba en ello,
porque traigo en tantas cosas divertidos los pensamientos, que de la
principal a que venía se me olvidaba.

-Sin duda -dijo Sancho- que este demonio debe de ser hombre de bien y buen
cristiano, porque, a no serlo, no jurara en Dios y en mi conciencia. Ahora
yo tengo para mí que aun en el mesmo infierno debe de haber buena gente.

Luego el Demonio, sin apearse, encaminando la vista a don Quijote, dijo:

-A ti, el Caballero de los Leones (que entre las garras dellos te vea yo),
me envía el desgraciado pero valiente caballero Montesinos, mandándome que
de su parte te diga que le esperes en el mismo lugar que te topare, a causa
que trae consigo a la que llaman Dulcinea del Toboso, con orden de darte la
que es menester para desencantarla. Y, por no ser para más mi venida, no ha
de ser más mi estada: los demonios como yo queden contigo, y los ángeles
buenos con estos señores.

Y, en diciendo esto, tocó el desaforado cuerno, y volvió las espaldas y
fuese, sin esperar respuesta de ninguno.

Renovóse la admiración en todos, especialmente en Sancho y don Quijote: en
Sancho, en ver que, a despecho de la verdad, querían que estuviese
encantada Dulcinea; en don Quijote, por no poder asegurarse si era verdad o
no lo que le había pasado en la cueva de Montesinos. Y, estando elevado en
estos pensamientos, el duque le dijo:

-¿Piensa vuestra merced esperar, señor don Quijote?

-Pues ¿no? -respondió él-. Aquí esperaré intrépido y fuerte, si me viniese
a embestir todo el infierno.

-Pues si yo veo otro diablo y oigo otro cuerno como el pasado, así esperaré
yo aquí como en Flandes -dijo Sancho.

En esto, se cerró más la noche, y comenzaron a discurrir muchas luces por
el bosque, bien así como discurren por el cielo las exhalaciones secas de
la tierra, que parecen a nuestra vista estrellas que corren. Oyóse asimismo
un espantoso ruido, al modo de aquel que se causa de las ruedas macizas que
suelen traer los carros de bueyes, de cuyo chirrío áspero y continuado se
dice que huyen los lobos y los osos, si los hay por donde pasan. Añadióse a
toda esta tempestad otra que las aumentó todas, que fue que parecía
verdaderamente que a las cuatro partes del bosque se estaban dando a un
mismo tiempo cuatro rencuentros o batallas, porque allí sonaba el duro
estruendo de espantosa artillería, acullá se disparaban infinitas
escopetas, cerca casi sonaban las voces de los combatientes, lejos se
reiteraban los lililíes agarenos.

Finalmente, las cornetas, los cuernos, las bocinas, los clarines, las
trompetas, los tambores, la artillería, los arcabuces, y, sobre todo, el
temeroso ruido de los carros, formaban todos juntos un son tan confuso y
tan horrendo, que fue menester que don Quijote se valiese de todo su
corazón para sufrirle; pero el de Sancho vino a tierra, y dio con él
desmayado en las faldas de la duquesa, la cual le recibió en ellas, y a
gran priesa mandó que le echasen agua en el rostro. Hízose así, y él volvió
en su acuerdo, a tiempo que ya un carro de las rechinantes ruedas llegaba a
aquel puesto.

Tirábanle cuatro perezosos bueyes, todos cubiertos de paramentos negros; en
cada cuerno traían atada y encendida una grande hacha de cera, y encima del
carro venía hecho un asiento alto, sobre el cual venía sentado un venerable
viejo, con una barba más blanca que la mesma nieve, y tan luenga que le
pasaba de la cintura; su vestidura era una ropa larga de negro bocací, que,
por venir el carro lleno de infinitas luces, se podía bien divisar y
discernir todo lo que en él venía. Guiábanle dos feos demonios vestidos del
mesmo bocací, con tan feos rostros, que Sancho, habiéndolos visto una vez,
cerró los ojos por no verlos otra. Llegando, pues, el carro a igualar al
puesto, se levantó de su alto asiento el viejo venerable, y, puesto en pie,
dando una gran voz, dijo:

-Yo soy el sabio Lirgandeo.

Y pasó el carro adelante, sin hablar más palabra. Tras éste pasó otro carro
de la misma manera, con otro viejo entronizado; el cual, haciendo que el
carro se detuviese, con voz no menos grave que el otro, dijo:

-Yo soy el sabio Alquife, el grande amigo de Urganda la Desconocida.

Y pasó adelante.

Luego, por el mismo continente, llegó otro carro; pero el que venía sentado
en el trono no era viejo como los demás, sino hombrón robusto y de mala
catadura, el cual, al llegar, levantándose en pie, como los otros, dijo con
voz más ronca y más endiablada:

-Yo soy Arcaláus el encantador, enemigo mortal de Amadís de Gaula y de toda
su parentela.

Y pasó adelante. Poco desviados de allí hicieron alto estos tres carros, y
cesó el enfadoso ruido de sus ruedas, y luego se oyó otro, no ruido, sino
un son de una suave y concertada música formado, con que Sancho se alegró,
y lo tuvo a buena señal; y así, dijo a la duquesa, de quien un punto ni un
paso se apartaba:

-Señora, donde hay música no puede haber cosa mala.

-Tampoco donde hay luces y claridad -respondió la duquesa.

A lo que replicó Sancho:

-Luz da el fuego y claridad las hogueras, como lo vemos en las que nos
cercan, y bien podría ser que nos abrasasen, pero la música siempre es
indicio de regocijos y de fiestas.

-Ello dirá -dijo don Quijote, que todo lo escuchaba.

Y dijo bien, como se muestra en el capítulo siguiente.





Capítulo XXXV. Donde se prosigue la noticia que tuvo don Quijote del
desencanto de Dulcinea, con otros admirables sucesos


Al compás de la agradable música vieron que hacia ellos venía un carro de
los que llaman triunfales tirado de seis mulas pardas, encubertadas,
empero, de lienzo blanco, y sobre cada una venía un diciplinante de luz,
asimesmo vestido de blanco, con una hacha de cera grande encendida en la
mano. Era el carro dos veces, y aun tres, mayor que los pasados, y los
lados, y encima dél, ocupaban doce otros diciplinantes albos como la nieve,
todos con sus hachas encendidas, vista que admiraba y espantaba juntamente;
y en un levantado trono venía sentada una ninfa, vestida de mil velos de
tela de plata, brillando por todos ellos infinitas hojas de argentería de
oro, que la hacían, si no rica, a lo menos vistosamente vestida. Traía el
rostro cubierto con un transparente y delicado cendal, de modo que, sin
impedirlo sus lizos, por entre ellos se descubría un hermosísimo rostro de
doncella, y las muchas luces daban lugar para distinguir la belleza y los
años, que, al parecer, no llegaban a veinte ni bajaban de diez y siete.

Junto a ella venía una figura vestida de una ropa de las que llaman
rozagantes, hasta los pies, cubierta la cabeza con un velo negro; pero, al
punto que llegó el carro a estar frente a frente de los duques y de don
Quijote, cesó la música de las chirimías, y luego la de las arpas y laúdes
que en el carro sonaban; y, levantándose en pie la figura de la ropa, la
apartó a entrambos lados, y, quitándose el velo del rostro, descubrió
patentemente ser la mesma figura de la muerte, descarnada y fea, de que don
Quijote recibió pesadumbre y Sancho miedo, y los duques hicieron algún
sentimiento temeroso. Alzada y puesta en pie esta muerte viva, con voz algo
dormida y con lengua no muy despierta, comenzó a decir desta manera:

   -Yo soy Merlín, aquel que las historias
   dicen que tuve por mi padre al diablo
   (mentira autorizada de los tiempos),
   príncipe de la Mágica y monarca
   y archivo de la ciencia zoroástrica,
   émulo a las edades y a los siglos
   que solapar pretenden las hazañas
   de los andantes bravos caballeros
   a quien yo tuve y tengo gran cariño.
   Y, puesto que es de los encantadores,
   de los magos o mágicos contino
   dura la condición, áspera y fuerte,
   la mía es tierna, blanda y amorosa,
   y amiga de hacer bien a todas gentes.
   En las cavernas lóbregas de Dite,
   donde estaba mi alma entretenida
   en formar ciertos rombos y caráteres,
   llegó la voz doliente de la bella
   y sin par Dulcinea del Toboso.
   Supe su encantamento y su desgracia,
   y su trasformación de gentil dama
   en rústica aldeana; condolíme,
   y, encerrando mi espíritu en el hueco
   desta espantosa y fiera notomía,
   después de haber revuelto cien mil libros
   desta mi ciencia endemoniada y torpe,
   vengo a dar el remedio que conviene
   a tamaño dolor, a mal tamaño.
   ¡Oh tú, gloria y honor de cuantos visten
   las túnicas de acero y de diamante,
   luz y farol, sendero, norte y guía
   de aquellos que, dejando el torpe sueño
   y las ociosas plumas, se acomodan
   a usar el ejercicio intolerable
   de las sangrientas y pesadas armas!
   A ti digo ¡oh varón, como se debe
   por jamás alabado!, a ti, valiente
   juntamente y discreto don Quijote,
   de la Mancha esplendor, de España estrella,
   que para recobrar su estado primo
   la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso,
   es menester que Sancho, tu escudero,
   se dé tres mil azotes y trecientos
   en ambas sus valientes posaderas,
   al aire descubiertas, y de modo
   que le escuezan, le amarguen y le enfaden.
   Y en esto se resuelven todos cuantos
   de su desgracia han sido los autores,
   y a esto es mi venida, mis señores.

-¡Voto a tal! -dijo a esta sazón Sancho-. No digo yo tres mil azotes, pero
así me daré yo tres como tres puñaladas. ¡Válate el diablo por modo de
desencantar! ¡Yo no sé qué tienen que ver mis posas con los encantos! ¡Par
Dios que si el señor Merlín no ha hallado otra manera como desencantar a la
señora Dulcinea del Toboso, encantada se podrá ir a la sepultura!

-Tomaros he yo -dijo don Quijote-, don villano, harto de ajos, y amarraros
he a un árbol, desnudo como vuestra madre os parió; y no digo yo tres mil y
trecientos, sino seis mil y seiscientos azotes os daré, tan bien pegados
que no se os caigan a tres mil y trecientos tirones. Y no me repliquéis
palabra, que os arrancaré el alma.

Oyendo lo cual Merlín, dijo:

-No ha de ser así, porque los azotes que ha de recebir el buen Sancho han
de ser por su voluntad, y no por fuerza, y en el tiempo que él quisiere;
que no se le pone término señalado; pero permítesele que si él quisiere
redemir su vejación por la mitad de este vapulamiento, puede dejar que se
los dé ajena mano, aunque sea algo pesada.

-Ni ajena, ni propia, ni pesada, ni por pesar -replicó Sancho-: a mí no me
ha de tocar alguna mano. ¿Parí yo, por ventura, a la señora Dulcinea del
Toboso, para que paguen mis posas lo que pecaron sus ojos? El señor mi amo
sí, que es parte suya, pues la llama a cada paso mi vida, mi alma, sustento
y arrimo suyo, se puede y debe azotar por ella y hacer todas las
diligencias necesarias para su desencanto; pero, ¿azotarme yo...?
¡Abernuncio!

Apenas acabó de decir esto Sancho, cuando, levantándose en pie la argentada
ninfa que junto al espíritu de Merlín venía, quitándose el sutil velo del
rostro, le descubrió tal, que a todos pareció mas que demasiadamente
hermoso, y, con un desenfado varonil y con una voz no muy adamada, hablando
derechamente con Sancho Panza, dijo:

-¡Oh malaventurado escudero, alma de cántaro, corazón de alcornoque, de
entrañas guijeñas y apedernaladas! Si te mandaran, ladrón desuellacaras,
que te arrojaras de una alta torre al suelo; si te pidieran, enemigo del
género humano, que te comieras una docena de sapos, dos de lagartos y tres
de culebras; si te persuadieran a que mataras a tu mujer y a tus hijos con
algún truculento y agudo alfanje, no fuera maravilla que te mostraras
melindroso y esquivo; pero hacer caso de tres mil y trecientos azotes, que
no hay niño de la doctrina, por ruin que sea, que no se los lleve cada mes,
admira, adarva, espanta a todas las entrañas piadosas de los que lo
escuchan, y aun las de todos aquellos que lo vinieren a saber con el
discurso del tiempo. Pon, ¡oh miserable y endurecido animal!, pon, digo,
esos tus ojos de machuelo espantadizo en las niñas destos míos, comparados
a rutilantes estrellas, y veráslos llorar hilo a hilo y madeja a madeja,
haciendo surcos, carreras y sendas por los hermosos campos de mis mejillas.
Muévate, socarrón y malintencionado monstro, que la edad tan florida mía,
que aún se está todavía en el diez y... de los años, pues tengo diez y
nueve y no llego a veinte, se consume y marchita debajo de la corteza de
una rústica labradora; y si ahora no lo parezco, es merced particular que
me ha hecho el señor Merlín, que está presente, sólo porque te enternezca
mi belleza; que las lágrimas de una afligida hermosura vuelven en algodón
los riscos, y los tigres en ovejas. Date, date en esas carnazas, bestión
indómito, y saca de harón ese brío, que a sólo comer y más comer te
inclina, y pon en libertad la lisura de mis carnes, la mansedumbre de mi
condición y la belleza de mi faz; y si por mí no quieres ablandarte ni
reducirte a algún razonable término, hazlo por ese pobre caballero que a tu
lado tienes; por tu amo, digo, de quien estoy viendo el alma, que la tiene
atravesada en la garganta, no diez dedos de los labios, que no espera sino
tu rígida o blanda repuesta, o para salirse por la boca, o para volverse al
estómago.

Tentóse, oyendo esto, la garganta don Quijote y dijo, volviéndose al duque:

-Por Dios, señor, que Dulcinea ha dicho la verdad, que aquí tengo el alma
atravesada en la garganta, como una nuez de ballesta.

-¿Qué decís vos a esto, Sancho? -preguntó la duquesa.

-Digo, señora -respondió Sancho-, lo que tengo dicho: que de los azotes,
abernuncio.

-Abrenuncio habéis de decir, Sancho, y no como decís -dijo el duque.

-Déjeme vuestra grandeza -respondió Sancho-, que no estoy agora para mirar
en sotilezas ni en letras más a menos; porque me tienen tan turbado estos
azotes que me han de dar, o me tengo de dar, que no sé lo que me digo, ni
lo que me hago. Pero querría yo saber de la señora mi señora doña Dulcina
del Toboso adónde aprendió el modo de rogar que tiene: viene a pedirme que
me abra las carnes a azotes, y llámame alma de cántaro y bestión indómito,
con una tiramira de malos nombres, que el diablo los sufra. ¿Por ventura
son mis carnes de bronce, o vame a mí algo en que se desencante o no? ¿Qué
canasta de ropa blanca, de camisas, de tocadores y de escarpines, anque
no los gasto, trae delante de sí para ablandarme, sino un vituperio y otro,
sabiendo aquel refrán que dicen por ahí, que un asno cargado de oro sube
ligero por una montaña, y que dádivas quebrantan peñas, y a Dios rogando y
con el mazo dando, y que más vale un "toma" que dos "te daré"? Pues el
señor mi amo, que había de traerme la mano por el cerro y halagarme para
que yo me hiciese de lana y de algodón cardado, dice que si me coge me
amarrará desnudo a un árbol y me doblará la parada de los azotes; y habían
de considerar estos lastimados señores que no solamente piden que se azote
un escudero, sino un gobernador; como quien dice: "bebe con guindas".
Aprendan, aprendan mucho de enhoramala a saber rogar, y a saber pedir, y a
tener crianza, que no son todos los tiempos unos, ni están los hombres
siempre de un buen humor. Estoy yo ahora reventando de pena por ver mi sayo
verde roto, y vienen a pedirme que me azote de mi voluntad, estando ella
tan ajena dello como de volverme cacique.

-Pues en verdad, amigo Sancho -dijo el duque-, que si no os ablandáis más
que una breva madura, que no habéis de empuñar el gobierno. ¡Bueno sería
que yo enviase a mis insulanos un gobernador cruel, de entrañas
pedernalinas, que no se doblega a las lágrimas de las afligidas doncellas,
ni a los ruegos de discretos, imperiosos y antiguos encantadores y sabios!
En resolución, Sancho, o vos habéis de ser azotado, o os han de azotar, o
no habéis de ser gobernador.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, ¿no se me darían dos días de término para pensar
lo que me está mejor?

-No, en ninguna manera -dijo Merlín-; aquí, en este instante y en este
lugar, ha de quedar asentado lo que ha de ser deste negocio, o Dulcinea
volverá a la cueva de Montesinos y a su prístino estado de labradora, o ya,
en el ser que está, será llevada a los Elíseos Campos, donde estará
esperando se cumpla el número del vápulo.

-Ea, buen Sancho -dijo la duquesa-, buen ánimo y buena correspondencia al
pan que habéis comido del señor don Quijote, a quien todos debemos servir y
agradar, por su buena condición y por sus altas caballerías. Dad el sí,
hijo, desta azotaina, y váyase el diablo para diablo y el temor para
mezquino; que un buen corazón quebranta mala ventura, como vos bien sabéis.

A estas razones respondió con éstas disparatadas Sancho, que, hablando con
Merlín, le preguntó:

-Dígame vuesa merced, señor Merlín: cuando llegó aquí el diablo correo y
dio a mi amo un recado del señor Montesinos, mandándole de su parte que le
esperase aquí, porque venía a dar orden de que la señora doña Dulcinea del
Toboso se desencantase, y hasta agora no hemos visto a Montesinos, ni a sus
semejas.

A lo cual respondió Merlín:

-El Diablo, amigo Sancho, es un ignorante y un grandísimo bellaco: yo le
envié en busca de vuestro amo, pero no con recado de Montesinos, sino mío,
porque Montesinos se está en su cueva entendiendo, o, por mejor decir,
esperando su desencanto, que aún le falta la cola por desollar. Si os debe
algo, o tenéis alguna cosa que negociar con él, yo os lo traeré y pondré
donde vos más quisiéredes. Y, por agora, acabad de dar el sí desta
diciplina, y creedme que os será de mucho provecho, así para el alma como
para el cuerpo: para el alma, por la caridad con que la haréis; para el
cuerpo, porque yo sé que sois de complexión sanguínea, y no os podrá hacer
daño sacaros un poco de sangre.

-Muchos médicos hay en el mundo: hasta los encantadores son médicos
-replicó Sancho-; pero, pues todos me lo dicen, aunque yo no me lo veo,
digo que soy contento de darme los tres mil y trecientos azotes, con
condición que me los tengo de dar cada y cuando que yo quisiere, sin que se
me ponga tasa en los días ni en el tiempo; y yo procuraré salir de la deuda
lo más presto que sea posible, porque goce el mundo de la hermosura de la
señora doña Dulcinea del Toboso, pues, según parece, al revés de lo que yo
pensaba, en efecto es hermosa. Ha de ser también condición que no he de
estar obligado a sacarme sangre con la diciplina, y que si algunos azotes
fueren de mosqueo, se me han de tomar en cuenta. Iten, que si me errare en
el número, el señor Merlín, pues lo sabe todo, ha de tener cuidado de
contarlos y de avisarme los que me faltan o los que me sobran.

-De las sobras no habrá que avisar -respondió Merlín-, porque, llegando al
cabal número, luego quedará de improviso desencantada la señora Dulcinea, y
vendrá a buscar, como agradecida, al buen Sancho, y a darle gracias, y aun
premios, por la buena obra. Así que no hay de qué tener escrúpulo de las
sobras ni de las faltas, ni el cielo permita que yo engañe a nadie, aunque
sea en un pelo de la cabeza.

-¡Ea, pues, a la mano de Dios! -dijo Sancho-. Yo consiento en mi mala
ventura; digo que yo acepto la penitencia con las condiciones apuntadas.

Apenas dijo estas últimas palabras Sancho, cuando volvió a sonar la música
de las chirimías y se volvieron a disparar infinitos arcabuces, y don
Quijote se colgó del cuello de Sancho, dándole mil besos en la frente y en
las mejillas. La duquesa y el duque y todos los circunstantes dieron
muestras de haber recebido grandísimo contento, y el carro comenzó a
caminar; y, al pasar, la hermosa Dulcinea inclinó la cabeza a los duques y
hizo una gran reverencia a Sancho.

Y ya, en esto, se venía a más andar el alba, alegre y risueña: las
florecillas de los campos se descollaban y erguían, y los líquidos
cristales de los arroyuelos, murmurando por entre blancas y pardas guijas,
iban a dar tributo a los ríos que los esperaban. La tierra alegre, el cielo
claro, el aire limpio, la luz serena, cada uno por sí y todos juntos, daban
manifiestas señales que el día, que al aurora venía pisando las faldas,
había de ser sereno y claro. Y, satisfechos los duques de la caza y de
haber conseguido su intención tan discreta y felicemente, se volvieron a su
castillo, con prosupuesto de segundar en sus burlas, que para ellos no
había veras que más gusto les diesen.





Capítulo XXXVI. Donde se cuenta la estraña y jamás imaginada aventura de la
dueña Dolorida, alias de la condesa Trifaldi, con una carta que Sancho
Panza escribió a su mujer Teresa Panza


Tenía un mayordomo el duque de muy burlesco y desenfadado ingenio, el cual
hizo la figura de Merlín y acomodó todo el aparato de la aventura pasada,
compuso los versos y hizo que un paje hiciese a Dulcinea. Finalmente, con
intervención de sus señores, ordenó otra del más gracioso y estraño
artificio que puede imaginarse.

Preguntó la duquesa a Sancho otro día si había comenzado la tarea de la
penitencia que había de hacer por el desencanto de Dulcinea. Dijo que sí,
y que aquella noche se había dado cinco azotes. Preguntóle la duquesa que
con qué se los había dado. Respondió que con la mano.

-Eso -replicó la duquesa- más es darse de palmadas que de azotes. Yo tengo
para mí que el sabio Merlín no estará contento con tanta blandura; menester
será que el buen Sancho haga alguna diciplina de abrojos, o de las de
canelones, que se dejen sentir; porque la letra con sangre entra, y no se
ha de dar tan barata la libertad de una tan gran señora como lo es Dulcinea
por tan poco precio; y advierta Sancho que las obras de caridad que se
hacen tibia y flojamente no tienen mérito ni valen nada.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Déme vuestra señoría alguna diciplina o ramal conveniente, que yo me daré
con él como no me duela demasiado, porque hago saber a vuesa merced que,
aunque soy rústico, mis carnes tienen más de algodón que de esparto, y no
será bien que yo me descríe por el provecho ajeno.

-Sea en buena hora -respondió la duquesa-: yo os daré mañana una diciplina
que os venga muy al justo y se acomode con la ternura de vuestras carnes,
como si fueran sus hermanas propias.

A lo que dijo Sancho:

-Sepa vuestra alteza, señora mía de mi ánima, que yo tengo escrita una
carta a mi mujer Teresa Panza, dándole cuenta de todo lo que me ha sucedido
después que me aparté della; aquí la tengo en el seno, que no le falta más
de ponerle el sobreescrito; querría que vuestra discreción la leyese,
porque me parece que va conforme a lo de gobernador, digo, al modo que
deben de escribir los gobernadores.

-¿Y quién la notó? -preguntó la duquesa.

-¿Quién la había de notar sino yo, pecador de mí? -respondió Sancho.

-¿Y escribístesla vos? -dijo la duquesa.

-Ni por pienso -respondió Sancho-, porque yo no sé leer ni escribir, puesto
que sé firmar.

-Veámosla -dijo la duquesa-, que a buen seguro que vos mostréis en ella la
calidad y suficiencia de vuestro ingenio.

Sacó Sancho una carta abierta del seno, y, tomándola la duquesa, vio que
decía desta manera:

Carta de Sancho Panza a Teresa Panza, su mujer

Si buenos azotes me daban, bien caballero me iba; si buen gobierno me
tengo, buenos azotes me cuesta. Esto no lo entenderás tú, Teresa mía, por
ahora; otra vez lo sabrás. Has de saber, Teresa, que tengo determinado que
andes en coche, que es lo que hace al caso, porque todo otro andar es andar
a gatas. Mujer de un gobernador eres, ¡mira si te roerá nadie los zancajos!
Ahí te envío un vestido verde de cazador, que me dio mi señora la duquesa;
acomódale en modo que sirva de saya y cuerpos a nuestra hija. Don Quijote,
mi amo, según he oído decir en esta tierra, es un loco cuerdo y un
mentecato gracioso, y que yo no le voy en zaga. Hemos estado en la cueva de
Montesinos, y el sabio Merlín ha echado mano de mí para el desencanto de
Dulcinea del Toboso, que por allá se llama Aldonza Lorenzo: con tres mil y
trecientos azotes, menos cinco, que me he de dar, quedará desencantada como
la madre que la parió. No dirás desto nada a nadie, porque pon lo tuyo en
concejo, y unos dirán que es blanco y otros que es negro. De aquí a pocos
días me partiré al gobierno, adonde voy con grandísimo deseo de hacer
dineros, porque me han dicho que todos los gobernadores nuevos van con este
mesmo deseo; tomaréle el pulso, y avisaréte si has de venir a estar conmigo
o no. El rucio está bueno, y se te encomienda mucho; y no le pienso dejar,
aunque me llevaran a ser Gran Turco. La duquesa mi señora te besa mil veces
las manos; vuélvele el retorno con dos mil, que no hay cosa que menos
cueste ni valga más barata, según dice mi amo, que los buenos
comedimientos. No ha sido Dios servido de depararme otra maleta con otros
cien escudos, como la de marras, pero no te dé pena, Teresa mía, que en
salvo está el que repica, y todo saldrá en la colada del gobierno; sino que
me ha dado gran pena que me dicen que si una vez le pruebo, que me tengo de
comer las manos tras él; y si así fuese, no me costaría muy barato, aunque
los estropeados y mancos ya se tienen su calonjía en la limosna que piden;
así que, por una vía o por otra, tú has de ser rica, de buena ventura. Dios
te la dé, como puede, y a mí me guarde para servirte. Deste castillo, a
veinte de julio de 1614.

Tu marido el gobernador,

Sancho Panza.

En acabando la duquesa de leer la carta, dijo a Sancho:

-En dos cosas anda un poco descaminado el buen gobernador: la una, en decir
o dar a entender que este gobierno se le han dado por los azotes que se ha
de dar, sabiendo él, que no lo puede negar, que cuando el duque, mi señor,
se le prometió, no se soñaba haber azotes en el mundo; la otra es que se
muestra en ella muy codicioso, y no querría que orégano fuese, porque la
codicia rompe el saco, y el gobernador codicioso hace la justicia
desgobernada.

-Yo no lo digo por tanto, señora -respondió Sancho-; y si a vuesa merced le
parece que la tal carta no va como ha de ir, no hay sino rasgarla y hacer
otra nueva, y podría ser que fuese peor si me lo dejan a mi caletre.

-No, no -replicó la duquesa-, buena está ésta, y quiero que el duque la
vea.

Con esto se fueron a un jardín, donde habían de comer aquel día. Mostró la
duquesa la carta de Sancho al duque, de que recibió grandísimo contento.
Comieron, y después de alzado los manteles, y después de haberse
entretenido un buen espacio con la sabrosa conversación de Sancho, a
deshora se oyó el son tristísimo de un pífaro y el de un ronco y
destemplado tambor. Todos mostraron alborotarse con la confusa, marcial y
triste armonía, especialmente don Quijote, que no cabía en su asiento de
puro alborotado; de Sancho no hay que decir sino que el miedo le llevó a su
acostumbrado refugio, que era el lado o faldas de la duquesa, porque real y
verdaderamente el son que se escuchaba era tristísimo y malencólico.

Y, estando todos así suspensos, vieron entrar por el jardín adelante dos
hombres vestidos de luto, tan luego y tendido que les arrastraba por el
suelo; éstos venían tocando dos grandes tambores, asimismo cubiertos de
negro. A su lado venía el pífaro, negro y pizmiento como los demás. Seguía
a los tres un personaje de cuerpo agigantado, amantado, no que vestido, con
una negrísima loba, cuya falda era asimismo desaforada de grande. Por
encima de la loba le ceñía y atravesaba un ancho tahelí, también negro, de
quien pendía un desmesurado alfanje de guarniciones y vaina negra. Venía
cubierto el rostro con un trasparente velo negro, por quien se entreparecía
una longísima barba, blanca como la nieve. Movía el paso al son de los
tambores con mucha gravedad y reposo. En fin, su grandeza, su contoneo, su
negrura y su acompañamiento pudiera y pudo suspender a todos aquellos que
sin conocerle le miraron.

Llegó, pues, con el espacio y prosopopeya referida a hincarse de rodillas
ante el duque, que en pie, con los demás que allí estaban, le atendía; pero
el duque en ninguna manera le consintió hablar hasta que se levantase.
Hízolo así el espantajo prodigioso, y, puesto en pie, alzó el antifaz del
rostro y hizo patente la más horrenda, la más larga, la más blanca y más
poblada barba que hasta entonces humanos ojos habían visto, y luego
desencajó y arrancó del ancho y dilatado pecho una voz grave y sonora, y,
poniendo los ojos en el duque, dijo:

-Altísimo y poderoso señor, a mí me llaman Trifaldín el de la Barba Blanca;
soy escudero de la condesa Trifaldi, por otro nombre llamada la Dueña
Dolorida, de parte de la cual traigo a vuestra grandeza una embajada, y es
que la vuestra magnificencia sea servida de darla facultad y licencia para
entrar a decirle su cuita, que es una de las más nuevas y más admirables
que el más cuitado pensamiento del orbe pueda haber pensado. Y primero
quiere saber si está en este vuestro castillo el valeroso y jamás vencido
caballero don Quijote de la Mancha, en cuya busca viene a pie y sin
desayunarse desde el reino de Candaya hasta este vuestro estado, cosa que
se puede y debe tener a milagro o a fuerza de encantamento. Ella queda a la
puerta desta fortaleza o casa de campo, y no aguarda para entrar sino
vuestro beneplácito. Dije.

Y tosió luego y manoseóse la barba de arriba abajo con entrambas manos, y
con mucho sosiego estuvo atendiendo la respuesta del duque, que fue:

-Ya, buen escudero Trifaldín de la Blanca Barba, ha muchos días que tenemos
noticia de la desgracia de mi señora la condesa Trifaldi, a quien los
encantadores la hacen llamar la Dueña Dolorida; bien podéis, estupendo
escudero, decirle que entre y que aquí está el valiente caballero don
Quijote de la Mancha, de cuya condición generosa puede prometerse con
seguridad todo amparo y toda ayuda; y asimismo le podréis decir de mi parte
que si mi favor le fuere necesario, no le ha de faltar, pues ya me tiene
obligado a dársele el ser caballero, a quien es anejo y concerniente
favorecer a toda suerte de mujeres, en especial a las dueñas viudas,
menoscabadas y doloridas, cual lo debe estar su señoría.

Oyendo lo cual Trifaldín, inclinó la rodilla hasta el suelo, y, haciendo al
pífaro y tambores señal que tocasen, al mismo son y al mismo paso que había
entrado, se volvió a salir del jardín, dejando a todos admirados de su
presencia y compostura. Y, volviéndose el duque a don Quijote, le dijo:

-En fin, famoso caballero, no pueden las tinieblas de malicia ni de la
ignorancia encubrir y escurecer la luz del valor y de la virtud. Digo esto
porque apenas ha seis días que la vuestra bondad está en este castillo,
cuando ya os vienen a buscar de lueñas y apartadas tierras, y no en
carrozas ni en dromedarios, sino a pie y en ayunas; los tristes, los
afligidos, confiados que han de hallar en ese fortísimo brazo el remedio de
sus cuitas y trabajos, merced a vuestras grandes hazañas, que corren y
rodean todo lo descubierto de la tierra.

-Quisiera yo, señor duque -respondió don Quijote-, que estuviera aquí
presente aquel bendito religioso que a la mesa el otro día mostró tener tan
mal talante y tan mala ojeriza contra los caballeros andantes, para que
viera por vista de ojos si los tales caballeros son necesarios en el mundo:
tocara, por lo menos, con la mano que los extraordinariamente afligidos y
desconsolados, en casos grandes y en desdichas inormes no van a buscar su
remedio a las casas de los letrados, ni a la de los sacristanes de las
aldeas, ni al caballero que nunca ha acertado a salir de los términos de su
lugar, ni al perezoso cortesano que antes busca nuevas para referirlas y
contarlas, que procura hacer obras y hazañas para que otros las cuenten y
las escriban; el remedio de las cuitas, el socorro de las necesidades, el
amparo de las doncellas, el consuelo de las viudas, en ninguna suerte de
personas se halla mejor que en los caballeros andantes, y de serlo yo doy
infinitas gracias al cielo, y doy por muy bien empleado cualquier desmán y
trabajo que en este tan honroso ejercicio pueda sucederme. Venga esta dueña
y pida lo que quisiere, que yo le libraré su remedio en la fuerza de mi
brazo y en la intrépida resolución de mi animoso espíritu.





Capítulo XXXVII. Donde se prosigue la famosa aventura de la dueña Dolorida


En estremo se holgaron el duque y la duquesa de ver cuán bien iba
respondiendo a su intención don Quijote, y a esta sazón dijo Sancho:

-No querría yo que esta señora dueña pusiese algún tropiezo a la promesa de
mi gobierno, porque yo he oído decir a un boticario toledano que hablaba
como un silguero que donde interviniesen dueñas no podía suceder cosa
buena. ¡Válame Dios, y qué mal estaba con ellas el tal boticario! De lo que
yo saco que, pues todas las dueñas son enfadosas e impertinentes, de
cualquiera calidad y condición que sean, ¿qué serán las que son doloridas,
como han dicho que es esta condesa Tres Faldas, o Tres Colas?; que en mi
tierra faldas y colas, colas y faldas, todo es uno.

-Calla, Sancho amigo -dijo don Quijote-, que, pues esta señora dueña de tan
lueñes tierras viene a buscarme, no debe ser de aquellas que el boticario
tenía en su número, cuanto más que ésta es condesa, y cuando las condesas
sirven de dueñas, será sirviendo a reinas y a emperatrices, que en sus
casas son señorísimas que se sirven de otras dueñas.

A esto respondió doña Rodríguez, que se halló presente:

-Dueñas tiene mi señora la duquesa en su servicio, que pudieran ser
condesas si la fortuna quisiera, pero allá van leyes do quieren reyes; y
nadie diga mal de las dueñas, y más de las antiguas y doncellas; que,
aunque yo no lo soy, bien se me alcanza y se me trasluce la ventaja que
hace una dueña doncella a una dueña viuda; y quien a nosotras trasquiló,
las tijeras le quedaron en la mano.

-Con todo eso -replicó Sancho-, hay tanto que trasquilar en las dueñas,
según mi barbero, cuanto será mejor no menear el arroz, aunque se pegue.

-Siempre los escuderos -respondió doña Rodríguez- son enemigos nuestros;
que, como son duendes de las antesalas y nos veen a cada paso, los ratos
que no rezan, que son muchos, los gastan en murmurar de nosotras,
desenterrándonos los huesos y enterrándonos la fama. Pues mándoles yo a los
leños movibles, que, mal que les pese, hemos de vivir en el mundo, y en las
casas principales, aunque muramos de hambre y cubramos con un negro monjil
nuestras delicadas o no delicadas carnes, como quien cubre o tapa un
muladar con un tapiz en día de procesión. A fe que si me fuera dado, y el
tiempo lo pidiera, que yo diera a entender, no sólo a los presentes, sino a
todo el mundo, cómo no hay virtud que no se encierre en una dueña.

-Yo creo -dijo la duquesa- que mi buena doña Rodríguez tiene razón, y muy
grande; pero conviene que aguarde tiempo para volver por sí y por las demás
dueñas, para confundir la mala opinión de aquel mal boticario, y
desarraigar la que tiene en su pecho el gran Sancho Panza.

A lo que Sancho respondió:

-Después que tengo humos de gobernador se me han quitado los váguidos de
escudero, y no se me da por cuantas dueñas hay un cabrahígo.

Adelante pasaran con el coloquio dueñesco, si no oyeran que el pífaro y los
tambores volvían a sonar, por donde entendieron que la dueña Dolorida
entraba. Preguntó la duquesa al duque si sería bien ir a recebirla, pues
era condesa y persona principal.

-Por lo que tiene de condesa -respondió Sancho, antes que el duque
respondiese-, bien estoy en que vuestras grandezas salgan a recebirla; pero
por lo de dueña, soy de parecer que no se muevan un paso.

-¿Quién te mete a ti en esto, Sancho? -dijo don Quijote.

-¿Quién, señor? -respondió Sancho-. Yo me meto, que puedo meterme, como
escudero que ha aprendido los términos de la cortesía en la escuela de
vuesa merced, que es el más cortés y bien criado caballero que hay en toda
la cortesanía; y en estas cosas, según he oído decir a vuesa merced, tanto
se pierde por carta de más como por carta de menos; y al buen entendedor,
pocas palabras.

-Así es, como Sancho dice -dijo el duque-: veremos el talle de la condesa,
y por él tantearemos la cortesía que se le debe.

En esto, entraron los tambores y el pífaro, como la vez primera.

Y aquí, con este breve capítulo, dio fin el autor, y comenzó el otro,
siguiendo la mesma aventura, que es una de las más notables de la historia.





Capítulo XXXVIII. Donde se cuenta la que dio de su mala andanza la dueña
Dolorida


Detrás de los tristes músicos comenzaron a entrar por el jardín adelante
hasta cantidad de doce dueñas, repartidas en dos hileras, todas vestidas de
unos monjiles anchos, al parecer, de anascote batanado, con unas tocas
blancas de delgado canequí, tan luengas que sólo el ribete del monjil
descubrían. Tras ellas venía la condesa Trifaldi, a quien traía de la mano
el escudero Trifaldín de la Blanca Barba, vestida de finísima y negra
bayeta por frisar, que, a venir frisada, descubriera cada grano del grandor
de un garbanzo de los buenos de Martos. La cola, o falda, o como llamarla
quisieren, era de tres puntas, las cuales se sustentaban en las manos de
tres pajes, asimesmo vestidos de luto, haciendo una vistosa y matemática
figura con aquellos tres ángulos acutos que las tres puntas formaban, por
lo cual cayeron todos los que la falda puntiaguda miraron que por ella se
debía llamar la condesa Trifaldi, como si dijésemos la condesa de las Tres
Faldas; y así dice Benengeli que fue verdad, y que de su propio apellido se
llama la condesa Lobuna, a causa que se criaban en su condado muchos lobos,
y que si como eran lobos fueran zorras, la llamaran la condesa Zorruna, por
ser costumbre en aquellas partes tomar los señores la denominación de sus
nombres de la cosa o cosas en que más sus estados abundan; empero esta
condesa, por favorecer la novedad de su falda, dejó el Lobuna y tomó el
Trifaldi.

Venían las doce dueñas y la señora a paso de procesión, cubiertos los
rostros con unos velos negros y no trasparentes como el de Trifaldín, sino
tan apretados que ninguna cosa se traslucían.

Así como acabó de parecer el dueñesco escuadrón, el duque, la duquesa y don
Quijote se pusieron en pie, y todos aquellos que la espaciosa procesión
miraban. Pararon las doce dueñas y hicieron calle, por medio de la cual la
Dolorida se adelantó, sin dejarla de la mano Trifaldín, viendo lo cual el
duque, la duquesa y don Quijote, se adelantaron obra de doce pasos a
recebirla. Ella, puesta las rodillas en el suelo, con voz antes basta y
ronca que sutil y dilicada, dijo:

-Vuestras grandezas sean servidas de no hacer tanta cortesía a este su
criado; digo, a esta su criada, porque, según soy de dolorida, no acertaré
a responder a lo que debo, a causa que mi estraña y jamás vista desdicha me
ha llevado el entendimiento no sé adónde, y debe de ser muy lejos, pues
cuanto más le busco menos le hallo.

-Sin él estaría -respondió el duque-, señora condesa, el que no descubriese
por vuestra persona vuestro valor, el cual, sin más ver, es merecedor de
toda la nata de la cortesía y de toda la flor de las bien criadas
ceremonias.

Y, levantándola de la mano, la llevó a asentar en una silla junto a la
duquesa, la cual la recibió asimismo con mucho comedimiento.

Don Quijote callaba, y Sancho andaba muerto por ver el rostro de la
Trifaldi y de alguna de sus muchas dueñas, pero no fue posible hasta que
ellas de su grado y voluntad se descubrieron.

Sosegados todos y puestos en silencio, estaban esperando quién le había de
romper, y fue la dueña Dolorida con estas palabras:

-Confiada estoy, señor poderosísimo, hermosísima señora y discretísimos
circunstantes, que ha de hallar mi cuitísima en vuestros valerosísimos
pechos acogimiento no menos plácido que generoso y doloroso, porque ella es
tal, que es bastante a enternecer los mármoles, y a ablandar los diamantes,
y a molificar los aceros de los más endurecidos corazones del mundo; pero,
antes que salga a la plaza de vuestros oídos, por no decir orejas, quisiera
que me hicieran sabidora si está en este gremio, corro y compañía el
acendradísimo caballero don Quijote de la Manchísima y su escuderísimo
Panza.

-El Panza -antes que otro respondiese, dijo Sancho- aquí esta, y el don
Quijotísimo asimismo; y así, podréis, dolorosísima dueñísima, decir lo que
quisieridísimis, que todos estamos prontos y aparejadísimos a ser vuestros
servidorísimos.

En esto se levantó don Quijote, y, encaminando sus razones a la Dolorida
dueña, dijo:

-Si vuestras cuitas, angustiada señora, se pueden prometer alguna esperanza
de remedio por algún valor o fuerzas de algún andante caballero, aquí están
las mías, que, aunque flacas y breves, todas se emplearán en vuestro
servicio. Yo soy don Quijote de la Mancha, cuyo asumpto es acudir a toda
suerte de menesterosos, y, siendo esto así, como lo es, no habéis menester,
señora, captar benevolencias ni buscar preámbulos, sino, a la llana y sin
rodeos, decir vuestros males, que oídos os escuchan que sabrán, si no
remediarlos, dolerse dellos.

Oyendo lo cual, la Dolorida dueña hizo señal de querer arrojarse a los pies
de don Quijote, y aun se arrojó, y, pugnando por abrazárselos, decía:

-Ante estos pies y piernas me arrojo, ¡oh caballero invicto!, por ser los
que son basas y colunas de la andante caballería; estos pies quiero besar,
de cuyos pasos pende y cuelga todo el remedio de mi desgracia, ¡oh valeroso
andante, cuyas verdaderas fazañas dejan atrás y escurecen las fabulosas de
los Amadises, Esplandianes y Belianises!

Y, dejando a don Quijote, se volvió a Sancho Panza, y, asiéndole de las
manos, le dijo:

-¡Oh tú, el más leal escudero que jamás sirvió a caballero andante en los
presentes ni en los pasados siglos, más luengo en bondad que la barba de
Trifaldín, mi acompañador, que está presente!, bien puedes preciarte que en
servir al gran don Quijote sirves en cifra a toda la caterva de caballeros
que han tratado las armas en el mundo. Conjúrote, por lo que debes a tu
bondad fidelísima, me seas buen intercesor con tu dueño, para que luego
favorezca a esta humilísima y desdichadísima condesa.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-De que sea mi bondad, señoría mía, tan larga y grande como la barba de
vuestro escudero, a mí me hace muy poco al caso; barbada y con bigotes
tenga yo mi alma cuando desta vida vaya, que es lo que importa, que de las
barbas de acá poco o nada me curo; pero, sin esas socaliñas ni plegarias,
yo rogaré a mi amo, que sé que me quiere bien, y más agora que me ha
menester para cierto negocio, que favorezca y ayude a vuesa merced en todo
lo que pudiere. Vuesa merced desembaúle su cuita y cuéntenosla, y deje
hacer, que todos nos entenderemos.

Reventaban de risa con estas cosas los duques, como aquellos que habían
tomado el pulso a la tal aventura, y alababan entre sí la agudeza y
disimulación de la Trifaldi, la cual, volviéndose a sentar, dijo:

-«Del famoso reino de Candaya, que cae entre la gran Trapobana y el mar del
Sur, dos leguas más allá del cabo Comorín, fue señora la reina doña
Maguncia, viuda del rey Archipiela, su señor y marido, de cuyo matrimonio
tuvieron y procrearon a la infanta Antonomasia, heredera del reino, la cual
dicha infanta Antonomasia se crió y creció debajo de mi tutela y doctrina,
por ser yo la más antigua y la más principal dueña de su madre. Sucedió,
pues, que, yendo días y viniendo días, la niña Antonomasia llegó a edad de
catorce años, con tan gran perfeción de hermosura, que no la pudo subir más
de punto la naturaleza. ¡Pues digamos agora que la discreción era mocosa!
Así era discreta como bella, y era la más bella del mundo, y lo es, si ya
los hados invidiosos y las parcas endurecidas no la han cortado la estambre
de la vida. Pero no habrán, que no han de permitir los cielos que se haga
tanto mal a la tierra como sería llevarse en agraz el racimo del más
hermoso veduño del suelo. De esta hermosura, y no como se debe encarecida
de mi torpe lengua, se enamoró un número infinito de príncipes, así
naturales como estranjeros, entre los cuales osó levantar los pensamientos
al cielo de tanta belleza un caballero particular que en la corte estaba,
confiado en su mocedad y en su bizarría, y en sus muchas habilidades y
gracias, y facilidad y felicidad de ingenio; porque hago saber a vuestras
grandezas, si no lo tienen por enojo, que tocaba una guitarra que la hacía
hablar, y más que era poeta y gran bailarín, y sabía hacer una jaula de
pájaros, que solamente a hacerlas pudiera ganar la vida cuando se viera en
estrema necesidad, que todas estas partes y gracias son bastantes a
derribar una montaña, no que una delicada doncella. Pero toda su gentileza
y buen donaire y todas sus gracias y habilidades fueran poca o ninguna
parte para rendir la fortaleza de mi niña, si el ladrón desuellacaras no
usara del remedio de rendirme a mí primero. Primero quiso el malandrín y
desalmado vagamundo granjearme la voluntad y cohecharme el gusto, para que
yo, mal alcaide, le entregase las llaves de la fortaleza que guardaba. En
resolución: él me aduló el entendimiento y me rindió la voluntad con no sé
qué dijes y brincos que me dio, pero lo que más me hizo postrar y dar
conmigo por el suelo fueron unas coplas que le oí cantar una noche desde
una reja que caía a una callejuela donde él estaba, que, si mal no me
acuerdo, decían:

   De la dulce mi enemiga
   nace un mal que al alma hiere,
   y, por más tormento, quiere
   que se sienta y no se diga.

Parecióme la trova de perlas, y su voz de almíbar, y después acá, digo,
desde entonces, viendo el mal en que caí por estos y otros semejantes
versos, he considerado que de las buenas y concertadas repúblicas se habían
de desterrar los poetas, como aconsejaba Platón, a lo menos, los lascivos,
porque escriben unas coplas, no como las del marqués de Mantua, que
entretienen y hacen llorar los niños y a las mujeres, sino unas agudezas
que, a modo de blandas espinas, os atraviesan el alma, y como rayos os
hieren en ella, dejando sano el vestido. Y otra vez cantó:

   Ven, muerte, tan escondida
   que no te sienta venir,
   porque el placer del morir
   no me torne a dar la vida.

Y deste jaez otras coplitas y estrambotes, que cantados encantan y escritos
suspenden. Pues, ¿qué cuando se humillan a componer un género de verso que
en Candaya se usaba entonces, a quien ellos llamaban seguidillas? Allí era
el brincar de las almas, el retozar de la risa, el desasosiego de los
cuerpos y, finalmente, el azogue de todos los sentidos. Y así, digo,
señores míos, que los tales trovadores con justo título los debían
desterrar a las islas de los Lagartos. Pero no tienen ellos la culpa, sino
los simples que los alaban y las bobas que los creen; y si yo fuera la
buena dueña que debía, no me habían de mover sus trasnochados conceptos, ni
había de creer ser verdad aquel decir: "Vivo muriendo, ardo en el yelo,
tiemblo en el fuego, espero sin esperanza, pártome y quédome", con otros
imposibles desta ralea, de que están sus escritos llenos. Pues, ¿qué cuando
prometen el fénix de Arabia, la corona de Aridiana, los caballos del Sol,
del Sur las perlas, de Tíbar el oro y de Pancaya el bálsamo? Aquí es donde
ellos alargan más la pluma, como les cuesta poco prometer lo que jamás
piensan ni pueden cumplir. Pero, ¿dónde me divierto? ¡Ay de mí, desdichada!
¿Qué locura o qué desatino me lleva a contar las ajenas faltas, teniendo
tanto que decir de las mías? ¡Ay de mí, otra vez, sin ventura!, que no me
rindieron los versos, sino mi simplicidad; no me ablandaron las músicas,
sino mi liviandad: mi mucha ignorancia y mi poco advertimiento abrieron el
camino y desembarazaron la senda a los pasos de don Clavijo, que éste es el
nombre del referido caballero; y así, siendo yo la medianera, él se halló
una y muy muchas veces en la estancia de la por mí, y no por él, engañada
Antonomasia, debajo del título de verdadero esposo; que, aunque pecadora,
no consintiera que sin ser su marido la llegara a la vira de la suela de
sus zapatillas. ¡No, no, eso no: el matrimonio ha de ir adelante en
cualquier negocio destos que por mí se tratare! Solamente hubo un daño en
este negocio, que fue el de la desigualdad, por ser don Clavijo un
caballero particular, y la infanta Antonomasia heredera, como ya he dicho,
del reino. Algunos días estuvo encubierta y solapada en la sagacidad de mi
recato esta maraña, hasta que me pareció que la iba descubriendo a más
andar no sé qué hinchazón del vientre de Antonomasia, cuyo temor nos hizo
entrar en bureo a los tres, y salió dél que, antes que se saliese a luz el
mal recado, don Clavijo pidiese ante el vicario por su mujer a Antonomasia,
en fe de una cédula que de ser su esposa la infanta le había hecho, notada
por mi ingenio, con tanta fuerza, que las de Sansón no pudieran romperla.
Hiciéronse las diligencias, vio el vicario la cédula, tomó el tal vicario
la confesión a la señora, confesó de plano, mandóla depositar en casa de un
alguacil de corte muy honrado...»

A esta sazón, dijo Sancho:

-También en Candaya hay alguaciles de corte, poetas y seguidillas, por lo
que puedo jurar que imagino que todo el mundo es uno. Pero dése vuesa
merced priesa, señora Trifaldi, que es tarde y ya me muero por saber el fin
desta tan larga historia.

-Sí haré -respondió la condesa.





Capítulo XXXIX. Donde la Trifaldi prosigue su estupenda y memorable
historia


De cualquiera palabra que Sancho decía, la duquesa gustaba tanto como se
desesperaba don Quijote; y, mandándole que callase, la Dolorida prosiguió
diciendo:

-«En fin, al cabo de muchas demandas y respuestas, como la infanta se
estaba siempre en sus trece, sin salir ni variar de la primera declaración,
el vicario sentenció en favor de don Clavijo, y se la entregó por su
legítima esposa, de lo que recibió tanto enojo la reina doña Maguncia,
madre de la infanta Antonomasia, que dentro de tres días la enterramos.»

-Debió de morir, sin duda -dijo Sancho.

-¡Claro está! -respondió Trifaldín-, que en Candaya no se entierran las
personas vivas, sino las muertas.

-Ya se ha visto, señor escudero -replicó Sancho-, enterrar un desmayado
creyendo ser muerto, y parecíame a mí que estaba la reina Maguncia obligada
a desmayarse antes que a morirse; que con la vida muchas cosas se remedian,
y no fue tan grande el disparate de la infanta que obligase a sentirle
tanto. Cuando se hubiera casado esa señora con algún paje suyo, o con otro
criado de su casa, como han hecho otras muchas, según he oído decir, fuera
el daño sin remedio; pero el haberse casado con un caballero tan
gentilhombre y tan entendido como aquí nos le han pintado, en verdad en
verdad que, aunque fue necedad, no fue tan grande como se piensa; porque,
según las reglas de mi señor, que está presente y no me dejará mentir, así
como se hacen de los hombres letrados los obispos, se pueden hacer de los
caballeros, y más si son andantes, los reyes y los emperadores.

-Razón tienes, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, porque un caballero andante, como
tenga dos dedos de ventura, está en potencia propincua de ser el mayor
señor del mundo. Pero, pase adelante la señora Dolorida, que a mí se me
trasluce que le falta por contar lo amargo desta hasta aquí dulce historia.

-Y ¡cómo si queda lo amargo! -respondió la condesa-, y tan amargo que en su
comparación son dulces las tueras y sabrosas las adelfas. «Muerta, pues, la
reina, y no desmayada, la enterramos; y, apenas la cubrimos con la tierra
y apenas le dimos el último vale, cuando,

quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis?,

puesto sobre un caballo de madera, pareció encima de la sepultura de la
reina el gigante Malambruno, primo cormano de Maguncia, que junto con ser
cruel era encantador, el cual con sus artes, en venganza de la muerte de su
cormana, y por castigo del atrevimiento de don Clavijo, y por despecho de
la demasía de Antonomasia, los dejó encantados sobre la mesma sepultura: a
ella, convertida en una jimia de bronce, y a él, en un espantoso cocodrilo
de un metal no conocido, y entre los dos está un padrón, asimismo de metal,
y en él escritas en lengua siríaca unas letras que, habiéndose declarado en
la candayesca, y ahora en la castellana, encierran esta sentencia: "No
cobrarán su primera forma estos dos atrevidos amantes hasta que el valeroso
manchego venga conmigo a las manos en singular batalla, que para solo su
gran valor guardan los hados esta nunca vista aventura". Hecho esto, sacó
de la vaina un ancho y desmesurado alfanje, y, asiéndome a mí por los
cabellos, hizo finta de querer segarme la gola y cortarme cercen la cabeza.
Turbéme, pegóseme la voz a la garganta, quedé mohína en todo estremo, pero,
con todo, me esforcé lo más que pude, y, con voz tembladora y doliente, le
dije tantas y tales cosas, que le hicieron suspender la ejecución de tan
riguroso castigo. Finalmente, hizo traer ante sí todas las dueñas de
palacio, que fueron estas que están presentes, y, después de haber
exagerado nuestra culpa y vituperado las condiciones de las dueñas, sus
malas mañas y peores trazas, y cargando a todas la culpa que yo sola tenía,
dijo que no quería con pena capital castigarnos, sino con otras penas
dilatadas, que nos diesen una muerte civil y continua; y, en aquel mismo
momento y punto que acabó de decir esto, sentimos todas que se nos abrían
los poros de la cara, y que por toda ella nos punzaban como con puntas de
agujas. Acudimos luego con las manos a los rostros, y hallámonos de la
manera que ahora veréis.»

Y luego la Dolorida y las demás dueñas alzaron los antifaces con que
cubiertas venían, y descubrieron los rostros, todos poblados de barbas,
cuáles rubias, cuáles negras, cuáles blancas y cuáles albarrazadas, de cuya
vista mostraron quedar admirados el duque y la duquesa, pasmados don
Quijote y Sancho, y atónitos todos los presentes.

Y la Trifaldi prosiguió:

-«Desta manera nos castigó aquel follón y malintencionado de Malambruno,
cubriendo la blandura y morbidez de nuestros rostros con la aspereza destas
cerdas, que pluguiera al cielo que antes con su desmesurado alfanje nos
hubiera derribado las testas, que no que nos asombrara la luz de nuestras
caras con esta borra que nos cubre; porque si entramos en cuenta, señores
míos (y esto que voy a decir agora lo quisiera decir hechos mis ojos
fuentes, pero la consideración de nuestra desgracia, y los mares que hasta
aquí han llovido, los tienen sin humor y secos como aristas, y así, lo diré
sin lágrimas), digo, pues, que ¿adónde podrá ir una dueña con barbas? ¿Qué
padre o qué madre se dolerá della? ¿Quién la dará ayuda? Pues, aun cuando
tiene la tez lisa y el rostro martirizado con mil suertes de menjurjes y
mudas, apenas halla quien bien la quiera, ¿qué hará cuando descubra hecho
un bosque su rostro? ¡Oh dueñas y compañeras mías, en desdichado punto
nacimos, en hora menguada nuestros padres nos engendraron!»

Y, diciendo esto, dio muestras de desmayarse.





Capítulo XL. De cosas que atañen y tocan a esta aventura y a esta
memorable historia


Real y verdaderamente, todos los que gustan de semejantes historias como
ésta deben de mostrarse agradecidos a Cide Hamete, su autor primero, por la
curiosidad que tuvo en contarnos las semínimas della, sin dejar cosa, por
menuda que fuese, que no la sacase a luz distintamente: pinta los
pensamientos, descubre las imaginaciones, responde a las tácitas, aclara
las dudas, resuelve los argumentos; finalmente, los átomos del más curioso
deseo manifiesta. ¡Oh autor celebérrimo! ¡Oh don Quijote dichoso! ¡Oh
Dulcinea famosa! ¡Oh Sancho Panza gracioso! Todos juntos y cada uno de por
sí viváis siglos infinitos, para gusto y general pasatiempo de los
vivientes.

Dice, pues, la historia que, así como Sancho vio desmayada a la Dolorida,
dijo:

-Por la fe de hombre de bien, juro, y por el siglo de todos mis pasados los
Panzas, que jamás he oído ni visto, ni mi amo me ha contado, ni en su
pensamiento ha cabido, semejante aventura como ésta. Válgate mil satanases,
por no maldecirte por encantador y gigante, Malambruno; y ¿no hallaste otro
género de castigo que dar a estas pecadoras sino el de barbarlas? ¿Cómo y
no fuera mejor, y a ellas les estuviera más a cuento, quitarles la mitad de
las narices de medio arriba, aunque hablaran gangoso, que no ponerles
barbas? Apostaré yo que no tienen hacienda para pagar a quien las rape.

-Así es la verdad, señor -respondió una de las doce-, que no tenemos
hacienda para mondarnos; y así, hemos tomado algunas de nosotras por
remedio ahorrativo de usar de unos pegotes o parches pegajosos, y
aplicándolos a los rostros, y tirando de golpe, quedamos rasas y lisas como
fondo de mortero de piedra; que, puesto que hay en Candaya mujeres que
andan de casa en casa a quitar el vello y a pulir las cejas y hacer otros
menjurjes tocantes a mujeres, nosotras las dueñas de mi señora por jamás
quisimos admitirlas, porque las más oliscan a terceras, habiendo dejado de
ser primas; y si por el señor don Quijote no somos remediadas, con barbas
nos llevarán a la sepultura.

-Yo me pelaría las mías -dijo don Quijote- en tierra de moros, si no
remediase las vuestras.

A este punto, volvió de su desmayo la Trifaldi y dijo:

-El retintín desa promesa, valeroso caballero, en medio de mi desmayo llegó
a mis oídos, y ha sido parte para que yo dél vuelva y cobre todos mis
sentidos; y así, de nuevo os suplico, andante ínclito y señor indomable,
vuestra graciosa promesa se convierta en obra.

-Por mí no quedará -respondió don Quijote-: ved, señora, qué es lo que
tengo de hacer, que el ánimo está muy pronto para serviros.

-Es el caso -respondió la Dolorida -que desde aquí al reino de Candaya, si
se va por tierra, hay cinco mil leguas, dos más a menos; pero si se va por
el aire y por la línea recta, hay tres mil y docientas y veinte y siete. Es
también de saber que Malambruno me dijo que cuando la suerte me deparase al
caballero nuestro libertador, que él le enviaría una cabalgadura harto
mejor y con menos malicias que las que son de retorno, porque ha de ser
aquel mesmo caballo de madera sobre quien llevó el valeroso Pierres robada
a la linda Magalona, el cual caballo se rige por una clavija que tiene en
la frente, que le sirve de freno, y vuela por el aire con tanta ligereza
que parece que los mesmos diablos le llevan. Este tal caballo, según es
tradición antigua, fue compuesto por aquel sabio Merlín; prestósele a
Pierres, que era su amigo, con el cual hizo grandes viajes, y robó, como se
ha dicho, a la linda Magalona, llevándola a las ancas por el aire, dejando
embobados a cuantos desde la tierra los miraban; y no le prestaba sino a
quien él quería, o mejor se lo pagaba; y desde el gran Pierres hasta
ahora no sabemos que haya subido alguno en él. De allí le ha sacado
Malambruno con sus artes, y le tiene en su poder, y se sirve dél en sus
viajes, que los hace por momentos, por diversas partes del mundo, y hoy
está aquí y mañana en Francia y otro día en Potosí; y es lo bueno que el
tal caballo ni come, ni duerme ni gasta herraduras, y lleva un portante por
los aires, sin tener alas, que el que lleva encima puede llevar una taza
llena de agua en la mano sin que se le derrame gota, según camina llano y
reposado; por lo cual la linda Magalona se holgaba mucho de andar caballera
en él.

A esto dijo Sancho:

-Para andar reposado y llano, mi rucio, puesto que no anda por los aires;
pero por la tierra, yo le cutiré con cuantos portantes hay en el mundo.

Riéronse todos, y la Dolorida prosiguió:

-Y este tal caballo, si es que Malambruno quiere dar fin a nuestra
desgracia, antes que sea media hora entrada la noche, estará en nuestra
presencia, porque él me significó que la señal que me daría por donde yo
entendiese que había hallado el caballero que buscaba, sería enviarme el
caballo, donde fuese con comodidad y presteza.

-Y ¿cuántos caben en ese caballo? -preguntó Sancho.

La Dolorida respondió:

-Dos personas: la una en la silla y la otra en las ancas; y, por la mayor
parte, estas tales dos personas son caballero y escudero, cuando falta
alguna robada doncella.

-Querría yo saber, señora Dolorida -dijo Sancho-, qué nombre tiene ese
caballo.

-El nombre -respondió la Dolorida- no es como el caballo de Belorofonte,
que se llamaba Pegaso, ni como el del Magno Alejandro, llamado Bucéfalo, ni
como el del furioso Orlando, cuyo nombre fue Brilladoro, ni menos Bayarte,
que fue el de Reinaldos de Montalbán, ni Frontino, como el de Rugero, ni
Bootes ni Peritoa, como dicen que se llaman los del Sol, ni tampoco se
llama Orelia, como el caballo en que el desdichado Rodrigo, último rey de
los godos, entró en la batalla donde perdió la vida y el reino.

-Yo apostaré -dijo Sancho- que, pues no le han dado ninguno desos famosos
nombres de caballos tan conocidos, que tampoco le habrán dado el de mi amo,
Rocinante, que en ser propio excede a todos los que se han nombrado.

-Así es -respondió la barbada condesa-, pero todavía le cuadra mucho,
porque se llama Clavileño el Alígero, cuyo nombre conviene con el ser de
leño, y con la clavija que trae en la frente, y con la ligereza con que
camina; y así, en cuanto al nombre, bien puede competir con el famoso
Rocinante.

-No me descontenta el nombre -replicó Sancho-, pero ¿con qué freno o con
qué jáquima se gobierna?

-Ya he dicho -respondió la Trifaldi- que con la clavija, que, volviéndola a
una parte o a otra, el caballero que va encima le hace caminar como quiere,
o ya por los aires, o ya rastreando y casi barriendo la tierra, o por el
medio, que es el que se busca y se ha de tener en todas las acciones bien
ordenadas.

-Ya lo querría ver -respondió Sancho-, pero pensar que tengo de subir en
él, ni en la silla ni en las ancas, es pedir peras al olmo. ¡Bueno es que
apenas puedo tenerme en mi rucio, y sobre un albarda más blanda que la
mesma seda, y querrían ahora que me tuviese en unas ancas de tabla, sin
cojín ni almohada alguna! Pardiez, yo no me pienso moler por quitar las
barbas a nadie: cada cual se rape como más le viniere a cuento, que yo no
pienso acompañar a mi señor en tan largo viaje. Cuanto más, que yo no debo
de hacer al caso para el rapamiento destas barbas como lo soy para el
desencanto de mi señora Dulcinea.

-Sí sois, amigo -respondió la Trifaldi-, y tanto, que, sin vuestra
presencia, entiendo que no haremos nada.

-¡Aquí del rey! -dijo Sancho-: ¿qué tienen que ver los escuderos con las
aventuras de sus señores? ¿Hanse de llevar ellos la fama de las que acaban,
y hemos de llevar nosotros el trabajo? ¡Cuerpo de mí! Aun si dijesen los
historiadores: "El tal caballero acabó la tal y tal aventura, pero con
ayuda de fulano, su escudero, sin el cual fuera imposible el acabarla".
Pero, ¡que escriban a secas: "Don Paralipomenón de las Tres Estrellas acabó
la aventura de los seis vestiglos", sin nombrar la persona de su
escudero, que se halló presente a todo, como si no fuera en el mundo!
Ahora, señores, vuelvo a decir que mi señor se puede ir solo, y buen
provecho le haga, que yo me quedaré aquí, en compañía de la duquesa mi
señora, y podría ser que cuando volviese hallase mejorada la causa de la
señora Dulcinea en tercio y quinto; porque pienso, en los ratos ociosos y
desocupados, darme una tanda de azotes que no me la cubra pelo.

-Con todo eso, le habéis de acompañar si fuere necesario, buen Sancho,
porque os lo rogarán buenos; que no han de quedar por vuestro inútil temor
tan poblados los rostros destas señoras; que, cierto, sería mal caso.

-¡Aquí del rey otra vez! -replicó Sancho-. Cuando esta caridad se hiciera
por algunas doncellas recogidas, o por algunas niñas de la doctrina,
pudiera el hombre aventurarse a cualquier trabajo, pero que lo sufra por
quitar las barbas a dueñas, ¡mal año! Mas que las viese yo a todas con
barbas, desde la mayor hasta la menor, y de la más melindrosa hasta la más
repulgada.

-Mal estáis con las dueñas, Sancho amigo -dijo la duquesa-: mucho os vais
tras la opinión del boticario toledano. Pues a fe que no tenéis razón; que
dueñas hay en mi casa que pueden ser ejemplo de dueñas, que aquí está mi
doña Rodríguez, que no me dejará decir otra cosa.

-Mas que la diga vuestra excelencia -dijo Rodríguez-, que Dios sabe la
verdad de todo, y buenas o malas, barbadas o lampiñas que seamos las
dueñas, también nos parió nuestra madre como a las otras mujeres; y, pues
Dios nos echó en el mundo, Él sabe para qué, y a su misericordia me atengo,
y no a las barbas de nadie.

-Ahora bien, señora Rodríguez -dijo don Quijote-, y señora Trifaldi y
compañía, yo espero en el cielo que mirará con buenos ojos vuestras cuitas,
que Sancho hará lo que yo le mandare, ya viniese Clavileño y ya me viese
con Malambruno; que yo sé que no habría navaja que con más facilidad rapase
a vuestras mercedes como mi espada raparía de los hombros la cabeza de
Malambruno; que Dios sufre a los malos, pero no para siempre.

-¡Ay! -dijo a esta sazón la Dolorida-, con benignos ojos miren a vuestra
grandeza, valeroso caballero, todas las estrellas de las regiones celestes,
e infundan en vuestro ánimo toda prosperidad y valentía para ser escudo y
amparo del vituperoso y abatido género dueñesco, abominado de boticarios,
murmurado de escuderos y socaliñado de pajes; que mal haya la bellaca que
en la flor de su edad no se metió primero a ser monja que a dueña.
¡Desdichadas de nosotras las dueñas, que, aunque vengamos por línea recta,
de varón en varón, del mismo Héctor el troyano, no dejaran de echaros un
vos nuestras señoras, si pensasen por ello ser reinas! ¡Oh gigante
Malambruno, que, aunque eres encantador, eres certísimo en tus promesas!,
envíanos ya al sin par Clavileño, para que nuestra desdicha se acabe, que
si entra el calor y estas nuestras barbas duran, ¡guay de nuestra ventura!

Dijo esto con tanto sentimiento la Trifaldi, que sacó las lágrimas de los
ojos de todos los circunstantes, y aun arrasó los de Sancho, y propuso en
su corazón de acompañar a su señor hasta las últimas partes del mundo, si
es que en ello consistiese quitar la lana de aquellos venerables rostros.





Capítulo XLI. De la venida de Clavileño, con el fin desta dilatada aventura


Llegó en esto la noche, y con ella el punto determinado en que el famoso
caballo Clavileño viniese, cuya tardanza fatigaba ya a don Quijote,
pareciéndole que, pues Malambruno se detenía en enviarle, o que él no era
el caballero para quien estaba guardada aquella aventura, o que Malambruno
no osaba venir con él a singular batalla. Pero veis aquí cuando a deshora
entraron por el jardín cuatro salvajes, vestidos todos de verde yedra, que
sobre sus hombros traían un gran caballo de madera. Pusiéronle de pies en
el suelo, y uno de los salvajes dijo:

-Suba sobre esta máquina el que tuviere ánimo para ello.

-Aquí -dijo Sancho- yo no subo, porque ni tengo ánimo ni soy caballero.

Y el salvaje prosiguió diciendo:

-Y ocupe las ancas el escudero, si es que lo tiene, y fíese del valeroso
Malambruno, que si no fuere de su espada, de ninguna otra, ni de otra
malicia, será ofendido; y no hay más que torcer esta clavija que sobre el
cuello trae puesta, que él los llevará por los aires adonde los atiende
Malambruno; pero, porque la alteza y sublimidad del camino no les cause
váguidos, se han de cubrir los ojos hasta que el caballo relinche, que será
señal de haber dado fin a su viaje.

Esto dicho, dejando a Clavileño, con gentil continente se volvieron por
donde habían venido. La Dolorida, así como vio al caballo, casi con
lágrimas dijo a don Quijote:

-Valeroso caballero, las promesas de Malambruno han sido ciertas: el
caballo está en casa, nuestras barbas crecen, y cada una de nosotras y con
cada pelo dellas te suplicamos nos rapes y tundas, pues no está en más sino
en que subas en él con tu escudero y des felice principio a vuestro nuevo
viaje.

-Eso haré yo, señora condesa Trifaldi, de muy buen grado y de mejor
talante, sin ponerme a tomar cojín, ni calzarme espuelas, por no detenerme:
tanta es la gana que tengo de veros a vos, señora, y a todas estas dueñas
rasas y mondas.

-Eso no haré yo -dijo Sancho-, ni de malo ni de buen talante, en ninguna
manera; y si es que este rapamiento no se puede hacer sin que yo suba a las
ancas, bien puede buscar mi señor otro escudero que le acompañe, y estas
señoras otro modo de alisarse los rostros; que yo no soy brujo, para gustar
de andar por los aires. Y ¿qué dirán mis insulanos cuando sepan que su
gobernador se anda paseando por los vientos? Y otra cosa más: que habiendo
tres mil y tantas leguas de aquí a Candaya, si el caballo se cansa o el
gigante se enoja, tardaremos en dar la vuelta media docena de años, y ya ni
habrá ínsula ni ínsulos en el mundo que me conozan; y, pues se dice
comúnmente que en la tardanza va el peligro, y que cuando te dieren la
vaquilla acudas con la soguilla, perdónenme las barbas destas señoras, que
bien se está San Pedro en Roma; quiero decir que bien me estoy en esta
casa, donde tanta merced se me hace y de cuyo dueño tan gran bien espero
como es verme gobernador.

A lo que el duque dijo:

-Sancho amigo, la ínsula que yo os he prometido no es movible ni fugitiva:
raíces tiene tan hondas, echadas en los abismos de la tierra, que no la
arrancarán ni mudarán de donde está a tres tirones; y, pues vos sabéis que
sé yo que no hay ninguno género de oficio destos de mayor cantía que no se
granjee con alguna suerte de cohecho, cuál más, cuál menos, el que yo
quiero llevar por este gobierno es que vais con vuestro señor don Quijote a
dar cima y cabo a esta memorable aventura; que ahora volváis sobre
Clavileño con la brevedad que su ligereza promete, ora la contraria fortuna
os traiga y vuelva a pie, hecho romero, de mesón en mesón y de venta en
venta, siempre que volviéredes hallaréis vuestra ínsula donde la dejáis, y
a vuestros insulanos con el mesmo deseo de recebiros por su gobernador que
siempre han tenido, y mi voluntad será la mesma; y no pongáis duda en esta
verdad, señor Sancho, que sería hacer notorio agravio al deseo que de
serviros tengo.

-No más, señor -dijo Sancho-: yo soy un pobre escudero y no puedo llevar a
cuestas tantas cortesías; suba mi amo, tápenme estos ojos y encomiéndenme a
Dios, y avísenme si cuando vamos por esas altanerías podré encomendarme a
Nuestro Señor o invocar los ángeles que me favorezcan.

A lo que respondió Trifaldi:

-Sancho, bien podéis encomendaros a Dios o a quien quisiéredes, que
Malambruno, aunque es encantador, es cristiano, y hace sus encantamentos
con mucha sagacidad y con mucho tiento, sin meterse con nadie.

-¡Ea, pues -dijo Sancho-, Dios me ayude y la Santísima Trinidad de Gaeta!

-Desde la memorable aventura de los batanes -dijo don Quijote-, nunca he
visto a Sancho con tanto temor como ahora, y si yo fuera tan agorero como
otros, su pusilanimidad me hiciera algunas cosquillas en el ánimo. Pero
llegaos aquí, Sancho, que con licencia destos señores os quiero hablar
aparte dos palabras.

Y, apartando a Sancho entre unos árboles del jardín y asiéndole ambas las
manos, le dijo:

-Ya vees, Sancho hermano, el largo viaje que nos espera, y que sabe Dios
cuándo volveremos dél, ni la comodidad y espacio que nos darán los
negocios; así, querría que ahora te retirases en tu aposento, como que vas
a buscar alguna cosa necesaria para el camino, y, en un daca las pajas,
te dieses, a buena cuenta de los tres mil y trecientos azotes a que estás
obligado, siquiera quinientos, que dados te los tendrás, que el comenzar
las cosas es tenerlas medio acabadas.

-¡Par Dios -dijo Sancho-, que vuestra merced debe de ser menguado! Esto es
como aquello que dicen: "¡en priesa me vees y doncellez me demandas!"
¿Ahora que tengo de ir sentado en una tabla rasa, quiere vuestra merced que
me lastime las posas? En verdad en verdad que no tiene vuestra merced
razón. Vamos ahora a rapar estas dueñas, que a la vuelta yo le prometo a
vuestra merced, como quien soy, de darme tanta priesa a salir de mi
obligación, que vuestra merced se contente, y no le digo más.

Y don Quijote respondió:

-Pues con esa promesa, buen Sancho, voy consolado, y creo que la cumplirás,
porque, en efecto, aunque tonto, eres hombre verídico.

-No soy verde, sino moreno -dijo Sancho-, pero aunque fuera de mezcla,
cumpliera mi palabra.

Y con esto se volvieron a subir en Clavileño, y al subir dijo don Quijote:

-Tapaos, Sancho, y subid, Sancho, que quien de tan lueñes tierras envía por
nosotros no será para engañarnos, por la poca gloria que le puede redundar
de engañar a quien dél se fía; y, puesto que todo sucediese al revés de lo
que imagino, la gloria de haber emprendido esta hazaña no la podrá
escurecer malicia alguna.

-Vamos, señor -dijo Sancho-, que las barbas y lágrimas destas señoras las
tengo clavadas en el corazón, y no comeré bocado que bien me sepa hasta
verlas en su primera lisura. Suba vuesa merced y tápese primero, que si yo
tengo de ir a las ancas, claro está que primero sube el de la silla.

-Así es la verdad -replicó don Quijote.

Y, sacando un pañuelo de la faldriquera, pidió a la Dolorida que le
cubriese muy bien los ojos, y, habiéndoselos cubierto, se volvió a
descubrir y dijo:

-Si mal no me acuerdo, yo he leído en Virgilio aquello del Paladión de
Troya, que fue un caballo de madera que los griegos presentaron a la diosa
Palas, el cual iba preñado de caballeros armados, que después fueron la
total ruina de Troya; y así, será bien ver primero lo que Clavileño trae en
su estómago.

-No hay para qué -dijo la Dolorida-, que yo le fío y sé que Malambruno no
tiene nada de malicioso ni de traidor; vuesa merced, señor don Quijote,
suba sin pavor alguno, y a mi daño si alguno le sucediere.

Parecióle a don Quijote que cualquiera cosa que replicase acerca de su
seguridad sería poner en detrimento su valentía; y así, sin más altercar,
subió sobre Clavileño y le tentó la clavija, que fácilmente se rodeaba; y,
como no tenía estribos y le colgaban las piernas, no parecía sino figura de
tapiz flamenco pintada o tejida en algún romano triunfo. De mal talante y
poco a poco llegó a subir Sancho, y, acomodándose lo mejor que pudo en las
ancas, las halló algo duras y no nada blandas, y pidió al duque que, si
fuese posible, le acomodasen de algún cojín o de alguna almohada, aunque
fuese del estrado de su señora la duquesa, o del lecho de algún paje,
porque las ancas de aquel caballo más parecían de mármol que de leño.

A esto dijo la Trifaldi que ningún jaez ni ningún género de adorno sufría
sobre sí Clavileño; que lo que podía hacer era ponerse a mujeriegas, y que
así no sentiría tanto la dureza. Hízolo así Sancho, y, diciendo ''a Dios'',
se dejó vendar los ojos, y, ya después de vendados, se volvió a descubrir,
y, mirando a todos los del jardín tiernamente y con lágrimas, dijo que le
ayudasen en aquel trance con sendos paternostres y sendas avemarías, porque
Dios deparase quien por ellos los dijese cuando en semejantes trances se
viesen. A lo que dijo don Quijote:

-Ladrón, ¿estás puesto en la horca por ventura, o en el último término de
la vida, para usar de semejantes plegarias? ¿No estás, desalmada y cobarde
criatura, en el mismo lugar que ocupó la linda Magalona, del cual decendió,
no a la sepultura, sino a ser reina de Francia, si no mienten las
historias? Y yo, que voy a tu lado, ¿no puedo ponerme al del valeroso
Pierres, que oprimió este mismo lugar que yo ahora oprimo? Cúbrete,
cúbrete, animal descorazonado, y no te salga a la boca el temor que tienes,
a lo menos en presencia mía.

-Tápenme -respondió Sancho-; y, pues no quieren que me encomiende a Dios ni
que sea encomendado, ¿qué mucho que tema no ande por aquí alguna región de
diablos que den con nosotros en Peralvillo?

Cubriéronse, y, sintiendo don Quijote que estaba como había de estar, tentó
la clavija, y, apenas hubo puesto los dedos en ella, cuando todas las
dueñas y cuantos estaban presentes levantaron las voces, diciendo:

-¡Dios te guíe, valeroso caballero!

-¡Dios sea contigo, escudero intrépido!

-¡Ya, ya vais por esos aires, rompiéndolos con más velocidad que una saeta!

-¡Ya comenzáis a suspender y admirar a cuantos desde la tierra os están
mirando!

-¡Tente, valeroso Sancho, que te bamboleas! ¡Mira no cayas, que será peor
tu caída que la del atrevido mozo que quiso regir el carro del Sol, su
padre!

Oyó Sancho las voces, y, apretándose con su amo y ciñiéndole con los
brazos, le dijo:

-Señor, ¿cómo dicen éstos que vamos tan altos, si alcanzan acá sus voces, y
no parecen sino que están aquí hablando junto a nosotros?

-No repares en eso, Sancho, que, como estas cosas y estas volaterías van
fuera de los cursos ordinarios, de mil leguas verás y oirás lo que
quisieres. Y no me aprietes tanto, que me derribas; y en verdad que no sé
de qué te turbas ni te espantas, que osaré jurar que en todos los días de
mi vida he subido en cabalgadura de paso más llano: no parece sino que no
nos movemos de un lugar. Destierra, amigo, el miedo, que, en efecto, la
cosa va como ha de ir y el viento llevamos en popa.

-Así es la verdad -respondió Sancho-, que por este lado me da un viento tan
recio, que parece que con mil fuelles me están soplando.

Y así era ello, que unos grandes fuelles le estaban haciendo aire: tan bien
trazada estaba la tal aventura por el duque y la duquesa y su mayordomo,
que no le faltó requisito que la dejase de hacer perfecta.

Sintiéndose, pues, soplar don Quijote, dijo:

-Sin duda alguna, Sancho, que ya debemos de llegar a la segunda región del
aire, adonde se engendra el granizo, las nieves; los truenos, los
relámpagos y los rayos se engendran en la tercera región, y si es que desta
manera vamos subiendo, presto daremos en la región del fuego, y no sé yo
cómo templar esta clavija para que no subamos donde nos abrasemos.

En esto, con unas estopas ligeras de encenderse y apagarse, desde lejos,
pendientes de una caña, les calentaban los rostros. Sancho, que sintió el
calor, dijo:

-Que me maten si no estamos ya en el lugar del fuego, o bien cerca, porque
una gran parte de mi barba se me ha chamuscado, y estoy, señor, por
descubrirme y ver en qué parte estamos.

-No hagas tal -respondió don Quijote-, y acuérdate del verdadero cuento del
licenciado Torralba, a quien llevaron los diablos en volandas por el aire,
caballero en una caña, cerrados los ojos, y en doce horas llegó a Roma, y
se apeó en Torre de Nona, que es una calle de la ciudad, y vio todo el
fracaso y asalto y muerte de Borbón, y por la mañana ya estaba de vuelta en
Madrid, donde dio cuenta de todo lo que había visto; el cual asimismo dijo
que cuando iba por el aire le mandó el diablo que abriese los ojos, y los
abrió, y se vio tan cerca, a su parecer, del cuerpo de la luna, que la
pudiera asir con la mano, y que no osó mirar a la tierra por no
desvanecerse. Así que, Sancho, no hay para qué descubrirnos; que, el que
nos lleva a cargo, él dará cuenta de nosotros, y quizá vamos tomando puntas
y subiendo en alto para dejarnos caer de una sobre el reino de Candaya,
como hace el sacre o neblí sobre la garza para cogerla, por más que se
remonte; y, aunque nos parece que no ha media hora que nos partimos del
jardín, creéme que debemos de haber hecho gran camino.

-No sé lo que es -respondió Sancho Panza-, sólo sé decir que si la señora
Magallanes o Magalona se contentó destas ancas, que no debía de ser muy
tierna de carnes.

Todas estas pláticas de los dos valientes oían el duque y la duquesa y los
del jardín, de que recibían estraordinario contento; y, queriendo dar
remate a la estraña y bien fabricada aventura, por la cola de Clavileño le
pegaron fuego con unas estopas, y al punto, por estar el caballo lleno de
cohetes tronadores, voló por los aires, con estraño ruido, y dio con don
Quijote y con Sancho Panza en el suelo, medio chamuscados.

En este tiempo ya se habían desparecido del jardín todo el barbado
escuadrón de las dueñas y la Trifaldi y todo, y los del jardín quedaron
como desmayados, tendidos por el suelo. Don Quijote y Sancho se levantaron
maltrechos, y, mirando a todas partes, quedaron atónitos de verse en el
mesmo jardín de donde habían partido y de ver tendido por tierra tanto
número de gente; y creció más su admiración cuando a un lado del jardín
vieron hincada una gran lanza en el suelo y pendiente della y de dos
cordones de seda verde un pergamino liso y blanco, en el cual, con grandes
letras de oro, estaba escrito lo siguiente:

El ínclito caballero don Quijote de la Mancha feneció y acabó la aventura
de la condesa Trifaldi, por otro nombre llamada la dueña Dolorida, y
compañía, con sólo intentarla.

Malambruno se da por contento y satisfecho a toda su voluntad, y las barbas
de las dueñas ya quedan lisas y mondas, y los reyes don Clavijo y
Antonomasia en su prístino estado. Y, cuando se cumpliere el escuderil
vápulo, la blanca paloma se verá libre de los pestíferos girifaltes que la
persiguen, y en brazos de su querido arrullador; que así está ordenado por
el sabio Merlín, protoencantador de los encantadores.

Habiendo, pues, don Quijote leído las letras del pergamino, claro entendió
que del desencanto de Dulcinea hablaban; y, dando muchas gracias al cielo
de que con tan poco peligro hubiese acabado tan gran fecho, reduciendo a su
pasada tez los rostros de las venerables dueñas, que ya no parecían, se fue
adonde el duque y la duquesa aún no habían vuelto en sí, y, trabando de la
mano al duque, le dijo:

-¡Ea, buen señor, buen ánimo; buen ánimo, que todo es nada! La aventura es
ya acabada sin daño de barras, como lo muestra claro el escrito que en
aquel padrón está puesto.

El duque, poco a poco, y como quien de un pesado sueño recuerda, fue
volviendo en sí, y por el mismo tenor la duquesa y todos los que por el
jardín estaban caídos, con tales muestras de maravilla y espanto, que casi
se podían dar a entender haberles acontecido de veras lo que tan bien
sabían fingir de burlas. Leyó el duque el cartel con los ojos medio
cerrados, y luego, con los brazos abiertos, fue a abrazar a don Quijote,
diciéndole ser el más buen caballero que en ningún siglo se hubiese visto.

Sancho andaba mirando por la Dolorida, por ver qué rostro tenía sin las
barbas, y si era tan hermosa sin ellas como su gallarda disposición
prometía, pero dijéronle que, así como Clavileño bajó ardiendo por los
aires y dio en el suelo, todo el escuadrón de las dueñas, con la Trifaldi,
había desaparecido, y que ya iban rapadas y sin cañones. Preguntó la
duquesa a Sancho que cómo le había ido en aquel largo viaje. A lo cual
Sancho respondió:

-Yo, señora, sentí que íbamos, según mi señor me dijo, volando por la
región del fuego, y quise descubrirme un poco los ojos, pero mi amo, a
quien pedí licencia para descubrirme, no la consintió; mas yo, que tengo no
sé qué briznas de curioso y de desear saber lo que se me estorba y impide,
bonitamente y sin que nadie lo viese, por junto a las narices aparté tanto
cuanto el pañizuelo que me tapaba los ojos, y por allí miré hacia la
tierra, y parecióme que toda ella no era mayor que un grano de mostaza, y
los hombres que andaban sobre ella, poco mayores que avellanas; porque se
vea cuán altos debíamos de ir entonces.

A esto dijo la duquesa:

-Sancho amigo, mirad lo que decís, que, a lo que parece, vos no vistes la
tierra, sino los hombres que andaban sobre ella; y está claro que si la
tierra os pareció como un grano de mostaza, y cada hombre como una
avellana, un hombre solo había de cubrir toda la tierra.

-Así es verdad -respondió Sancho-, pero, con todo eso, la descubrí por un
ladito, y la vi toda.

-Mirad, Sancho -dijo la duquesa-, que por un ladito no se vee el todo de lo
que se mira.

-Yo no sé esas miradas -replicó Sancho-: sólo sé que será bien que vuestra
señoría entienda que, pues volábamos por encantamento, por encantamento
podía yo ver toda la tierra y todos los hombres por doquiera que los
mirara; y si esto no se me cree, tampoco creerá vuestra merced cómo,
descubriéndome por junto a las cejas, me vi tan junto al cielo que no había
de mí a él palmo y medio, y por lo que puedo jurar, señora mía, que es muy
grande además. Y sucedió que íbamos por parte donde están las siete
cabrillas; y en Dios y en mi ánima que, como yo en mi niñez fui en mi
tierra cabrerizo, que así como las vi, ¡me dio una gana de entretenerme con
ellas un rato...! Y si no le cumpliera me parece que reventara. Vengo,
pues, y tomo, y ¿qué hago? Sin decir nada a nadie, ni a mi señor tampoco,
bonita y pasitamente me apeé de Clavileño, y me entretuve con las
cabrillas, que son como unos alhelíes y como unas flores, casi tres cuartos
de hora, y Clavileño no se movió de un lugar, ni pasó adelante.

-Y, en tanto que el buen Sancho se entretenía con las cabras -preguntó el
duque-, ¿en qué se entretenía el señor don Quijote?

A lo que don Quijote respondió:

-Como todas estas cosas y estos tales sucesos van fuera del orden natural,
no es mucho que Sancho diga lo que dice. De mí sé decir que ni me descubrí
por alto ni por bajo, ni vi el cielo ni la tierra, ni la mar ni las arenas.
Bien es verdad que sentí que pasaba por la región del aire, y aun que
tocaba a la del fuego; pero que pasásemos de allí no lo puedo creer, pues,
estando la región del fuego entre el cielo de la luna y la última región
del aire, no podíamos llegar al cielo donde están las siete cabrillas que
Sancho dice, sin abrasarnos; y, pues no nos asuramos, o Sancho miente o
Sancho sueña.

-Ni miento ni sueño -respondió Sancho-: si no, pregúntenme las señas de las
tales cabras, y por ellas verán si digo verdad o no.

-Dígalas, pues, Sancho -dijo la duquesa.

-Son -respondió Sancho- las dos verdes, las dos encarnadas, las dos azules,
y la una de mezcla.

-Nueva manera de cabras es ésa -dijo el duque-, y por esta nuestra región
del suelo no se usan tales colores; digo, cabras de tales colores.

-Bien claro está eso -dijo Sancho-; sí, que diferencia ha de haber de las
cabras del cielo a las del suelo.

-Decidme, Sancho -preguntó el duque-: ¿vistes allá en entre esas cabras
algún cabrón?

-No, señor -respondió Sancho-, pero oí decir que ninguno pasaba de los
cuernos de la luna.

No quisieron preguntarle más de su viaje, porque les pareció que llevaba
Sancho hilo de pasearse por todos los cielos, y dar nuevas de cuanto allá
pasaba, sin haberse movido del jardín.

En resolución, éste fue el fin de la aventura de la dueña Dolorida, que dio
que reír a los duques, no sólo aquel tiempo, sino el de toda su vida, y que
contar a Sancho siglos, si los viviera; y, llegándose don Quijote a Sancho,
al oído le dijo:

-Sancho, pues vos queréis que se os crea lo que habéis visto en el cielo,
yo quiero que vos me creáis a mí lo que vi en la cueva de Montesinos; y no
os digo más.





Capítulo XLII. De los consejos que dio don Quijote a Sancho Panza antes que
fuese a gobernar la ínsula, con otras cosas bien consideradas


Con el felice y gracioso suceso de la aventura de la Dolorida, quedaron tan
contentos los duques, que determinaron pasar con las burlas adelante,
viendo el acomodado sujeto que tenían para que se tuviesen por veras; y
así, habiendo dado la traza y órdenes que sus criados y sus vasallos habían
de guardar con Sancho en el gobierno de la ínsula prometida, otro día, que
fue el que sucedió al vuelo de Clavileño, dijo el duque a Sancho que se
adeliñase y compusiese para ir a ser gobernador, que ya sus insulanos le
estaban esperando como el agua de mayo. Sancho se le humilló y le dijo:

-Después que bajé del cielo, y después que desde su alta cumbre miré la
tierra y la vi tan pequeña, se templó en parte en mí la gana que tenía tan
grande de ser gobernador; porque, ¿qué grandeza es mandar en un grano de
mostaza, o qué dignidad o imperio el gobernar a media docena de hombres
tamaños como avellanas, que, a mi parecer, no había más en toda la tierra?
Si vuestra señoría fuese servido de darme una tantica parte del cielo,
aunque no fuese más de media legua, la tomaría de mejor gana que la mayor
ínsula del mundo.

-Mirad, amigo Sancho -respondió el duque-: yo no puedo dar parte del cielo
a nadie, aunque no sea mayor que una uña, que a solo Dios están reservadas
esas mercedes y gracias. Lo que puedo dar os doy, que es una ínsula hecha y
derecha, redonda y bien proporcionada, y sobremanera fértil y abundosa,
donde si vos os sabéis dar maña, podéis con las riquezas de la tierra
granjear las del cielo.

-Ahora bien -respondió Sancho-, venga esa ínsula, que yo pugnaré por ser
tal gobernador que, a pesar de bellacos, me vaya al cielo; y esto no es por
codicia que yo tenga de salir de mis casillas ni de levantarme a mayores,
sino por el deseo que tengo de probar a qué sabe el ser gobernador.

-Si una vez lo probáis, Sancho -dijo el duque-, comeros heis las manos tras
el gobierno, por ser dulcísima cosa el mandar y ser obedecido. A buen
seguro que cuando vuestro dueño llegue a ser emperador, que lo será sin
duda, según van encaminadas sus cosas, que no se lo arranquen comoquiera, y
que le duela y le pese en la mitad del alma del tiempo que hubiere dejado
de serlo.

-Señor -replicó Sancho-, yo imagino que es bueno mandar, aunque sea a un
hato de ganado.

-Con vos me entierren, Sancho, que sabéis de todo -respondió el duque-, y
yo espero que seréis tal gobernador como vuestro juicio promete, y quédese
esto aquí y advertid que mañana en ese mesmo día habéis de ir al gobierno
de la ínsula, y esta tarde os acomodarán del traje conveniente que habéis
de llevar y de todas las cosas necesarias a vuestra partida.

-Vístanme -dijo Sancho- como quisieren, que de cualquier manera que vaya
vestido seré Sancho Panza.

-Así es verdad -dijo el duque-, pero los trajes se han de acomodar con el
oficio o dignidad que se profesa, que no sería bien que un jurisperito se
vistiese como soldado, ni un soldado como un sacerdote. Vos, Sancho, iréis
vestido parte de letrado y parte de capitán, porque en la ínsula que os doy
tanto son menester las armas como las letras, y las letras como las armas.

-Letras -respondió Sancho-, pocas tengo, porque aún no sé el A, B, C; pero
bástame tener el Christus en la memoria para ser buen gobernador. De las
armas manejaré las que me dieren, hasta caer, y Dios delante.

-Con tan buena memoria -dijo el duque-, no podrá Sancho errar en nada.

En esto llegó don Quijote, y, sabiendo lo que pasaba y la celeridad con que
Sancho se había de partir a su gobierno, con licencia del duque le tomó por
la mano y se fue con él a su estancia, con intención de aconsejarle cómo se
había de haber en su oficio.

Entrados, pues, en su aposento, cerró tras sí la puerta, y hizo casi por
fuerza que Sancho se sentase junto a él, y con reposada voz le dijo:

-Infinitas gracias doy al cielo, Sancho amigo, de que, antes y primero que
yo haya encontrado con alguna buena dicha, te haya salido a ti a recebir y
a encontrar la buena ventura. Yo, que en mi buena suerte te tenía librada
la paga de tus servicios, me veo en los principios de aventajarme, y tú,
antes de tiempo, contra la ley del razonable discurso, te vees premiado de
tus deseos. Otros cohechan, importunan, solicitan, madrugan, ruegan,
porfían, y no alcanzan lo que pretenden; y llega otro, y sin saber cómo ni
cómo no, se halla con el cargo y oficio que otros muchos pretendieron; y
aquí entra y encaja bien el decir que hay buena y mala fortuna en las
pretensiones. Tú, que para mí, sin duda alguna, eres un porro, sin madrugar
ni trasnochar y sin hacer diligencia alguna, con solo el aliento que te ha
tocado de la andante caballería, sin más ni más te vees gobernador de una
ínsula, como quien no dice nada. Todo esto digo, ¡oh Sancho!, para que no
atribuyas a tus merecimientos la merced recebida, sino que des gracias al
cielo, que dispone suavemente las cosas, y después las darás a la grandeza
que en sí encierra la profesión de la caballería andante. Dispuesto, pues,
el corazón a creer lo que te he dicho, está, ¡oh hijo!, atento a este tu
Catón, que quiere aconsejarte y ser norte y guía que te encamine y saque a
seguro puerto deste mar proceloso donde vas a engolfarte; que los oficios y
grandes cargos no son otra cosa sino un golfo profundo de confusiones.
Primeramente, ¡oh hijo!, has de temer a Dios, porque en el temerle está la
sabiduría, y siendo sabio no podrás errar en nada. Lo segundo, has de poner
los ojos en quien eres, procurando conocerte a ti mismo, que es el más
difícil conocimiento que puede imaginarse. Del conocerte saldrá el no
hincharte como la rana que quiso igualarse con el buey, que si esto haces,
vendrá a ser feos pies de la rueda de tu locura la consideración de haber
guardado puercos en tu tierra.

-Así es la verdad -respondió Sancho-, pero fue cuando muchacho; pero
después, algo hombrecillo, gansos fueron los que guardé, que no puercos;
pero esto paréceme a mí que no hace al caso, que no todos los que gobiernan
vienen de casta de reyes.

-Así es verdad -replicó don Quijote-, por lo cual los no de principios
nobles deben acompañar la gravedad del cargo que ejercitan con una blanda
suavidad que, guiada por la prudencia, los libre de la murmuración
maliciosa, de quien no hay estado que se escape. Haz gala, Sancho, de la
humildad de tu linaje, y no te desprecies de decir que vienes de
labradores; porque, viendo que no te corres, ninguno se pondrá a correrte;
y préciate más de ser humilde virtuoso que pecador soberbio. Inumerables
son aquellos que, de baja estirpe nacidos, han subido a la suma dignidad
pontificia e imperatoria; y desta verdad te pudiera traer tantos ejemplos,
que te cansaran. Mira, Sancho: si tomas por medio a la virtud, y te precias
de hacer hechos virtuosos, no hay para qué tener envidia a los que los
tienen de príncipes y señores, porque la sangre se hereda y la virtud se
aquista, y la virtud vale por sí sola lo que la sangre no vale. Siendo esto
así, como lo es, que si acaso viniere a verte cuando estés en tu ínsula
alguno de tus parientes, no le deseches ni le afrentes; antes le has de
acoger, agasajar y regalar, que con esto satisfarás al cielo, que gusta que
nadie se desprecie de lo que él hizo, y corresponderás a lo que debes a la
naturaleza bien concertada. Si trujeres a tu mujer contigo (porque no es
bien que los que asisten a gobiernos de mucho tiempo estén sin las
propias), enséñala, doctrínala y desbástala de su natural rudeza, porque
todo lo que suele adquirir un gobernador discreto suele perder y derramar
una mujer rústica y tonta. Si acaso enviudares, cosa que puede suceder, y
con el cargo mejorares de consorte, no la tomes tal, que te sirva de
anzuelo y de caña de pescar, y del no quiero de tu capilla, porque en
verdad te digo que de todo aquello que la mujer del juez recibiere ha de
dar cuenta el marido en la residencia universal, donde pagará con el cuatro
tanto en la muerte las partidas de que no se hubiere hecho cargo en la
vida. Nunca te guíes por la ley del encaje, que suele tener mucha cabida
con los ignorantes que presumen de agudos. Hallen en ti más compasión las
lágrimas del pobre, pero no más justicia, que las informaciones del rico.
Procura descubrir la verdad por entre las promesas y dádivas del rico, como
por entre los sollozos e importunidades del pobre. Cuando pudiere y debiere
tener lugar la equidad, no cargues todo el rigor de la ley al delincuente,
que no es mejor la fama del juez riguroso que la del compasivo. Si acaso
doblares la vara de la justicia, no sea con el peso de la dádiva, sino con
el de la misericordia. Cuando te sucediere juzgar algún pleito de algún tu
enemigo, aparta las mientes de tu injuria y ponlas en la verdad del caso.
No te ciegue la pasión propia en la causa ajena, que los yerros que en ella
hicieres, las más veces, serán sin remedio; y si le tuvieren, será a costa
de tu crédito, y aun de tu hacienda. Si alguna mujer hermosa veniere a
pedirte justicia, quita los ojos de sus lágrimas y tus oídos de sus
gemidos, y considera de espacio la sustancia de lo que pide, si no quieres
que se anegue tu razón en su llanto y tu bondad en sus suspiros. Al que has
de castigar con obras no trates mal con palabras, pues le basta al
desdichado la pena del suplicio, sin la añadidura de las malas razones. Al
culpado que cayere debajo de tu juridición considérale hombre miserable,
sujeto a las condiciones de la depravada naturaleza nuestra, y en todo
cuanto fuere de tu parte, sin hacer agravio a la contraria, muéstratele
piadoso y clemente, porque, aunque los atributos de Dios todos son iguales,
más resplandece y campea a nuestro ver el de la misericordia que el de la
justicia. Si estos preceptos y estas reglas sigues, Sancho, serán luengos
tus días, tu fama será eterna, tus premios colmados, tu felicidad
indecible, casarás tus hijos como quisieres, títulos tendrán ellos y tus
nietos, vivirás en paz y beneplácito de las gentes, y en los últimos pasos
de la vida te alcanzará el de la muerte, en vejez suave y madura, y
cerrarán tus ojos las tiernas y delicadas manos de tus terceros netezuelos.
Esto que hasta aquí te he dicho son documentos que han de adornar tu alma;
escucha ahora los que han de servir para adorno del cuerpo.





Capítulo XLIII. De los consejos segundos que dio don Quijote a Sancho Panza


¿Quién oyera el pasado razonamiento de don Quijote que no le tuviera por
persona muy cuerda y mejor intencionada? Pero, como muchas veces en el
progreso desta grande historia queda dicho, solamente disparaba en
tocándole en la caballería, y en los demás discursos mostraba tener claro y
desenfadado entendimiento, de manera que a cada paso desacreditaban sus
obras su juicio, y su juicio sus obras; pero en ésta destos segundos
documentos que dio a Sancho, mostró tener gran donaire, y puso su
discreción y su locura en un levantado punto.

Atentísimamente le escuchaba Sancho, y procuraba conservar en la memoria
sus consejos, como quien pensaba guardarlos y salir por ellos a buen parto
de la preñez de su gobierno. Prosiguió, pues, don Quijote, y dijo:

-En lo que toca a cómo has de gobernar tu persona y casa, Sancho, lo
primero que te encargo es que seas limpio, y que te cortes las uñas, sin
dejarlas crecer, como algunos hacen, a quien su ignorancia les ha dado a
entender que las uñas largas les hermosean las manos, como si aquel
escremento y añadidura que se dejan de cortar fuese uña, siendo antes
garras de cernícalo lagartijero: puerco y extraordinario abuso. No andes,
Sancho, desceñido y flojo, que el vestido descompuesto da indicios de ánimo
desmazalado, si ya la descompostura y flojedad no cae debajo de
socarronería, como se juzgó en la de Julio César. Toma con discreción el
pulso a lo que pudiere valer tu oficio, y si sufriere que des librea a tus
criados, dásela honesta y provechosa más que vistosa y bizarra, y repártela
entre tus criados y los pobres: quiero decir que si has de vestir seis
pajes, viste tres y otros tres pobres, y así tendrás pajes para el cielo y
para el suelo; y este nuevo modo de dar librea no la alcanzan los
vanagloriosos. No comas ajos ni cebollas, porque no saquen por el olor tu
villanería. Anda despacio; habla con reposo, pero no de manera que parezca
que te escuchas a ti mismo, que toda afectación es mala. Come poco y cena
más poco, que la salud de todo el cuerpo se fragua en la oficina del
estómago. Sé templado en el beber, considerando que el vino demasiado ni
guarda secreto ni cumple palabra. Ten cuenta, Sancho, de no mascar a dos
carrillos, ni de erutar delante de nadie.

-Eso de erutar no entiendo -dijo Sancho.

Y don Quijote le dijo:

-Erutar, Sancho, quiere decir regoldar, y éste es uno de los más torpes
vocablos que tiene la lengua castellana, aunque es muy sinificativo; y así,
la gente curiosa se ha acogido al latín, y al regoldar dice erutar, y a los
regüeldos, erutaciones; y, cuando algunos no entienden estos términos,
importa poco, que el uso los irá introduciendo con el tiempo, que con
facilidad se entiendan; y esto es enriquecer la lengua, sobre quien tiene
poder el vulgo y el uso.

-En verdad, señor -dijo Sancho-, que uno de los consejos y avisos que
pienso llevar en la memoria ha de ser el de no regoldar, porque lo suelo
hacer muy a menudo.

-Erutar, Sancho, que no regoldar -dijo don Quijote.

-Erutar diré de aquí adelante -respondió Sancho-, y a fee que no se me
olvide.

-También, Sancho, no has de mezclar en tus pláticas la muchedumbre de
refranes que sueles; que, puesto que los refranes son sentencias breves,
muchas veces los traes tan por los cabellos, que más parecen disparates que
sentencias.

-Eso Dios lo puede remediar -respondió Sancho-, porque sé más refranes que
un libro, y viénenseme tantos juntos a la boca cuando hablo, que riñen por
salir unos con otros, pero la lengua va arrojando los primeros que
encuentra, aunque no vengan a pelo. Mas yo tendré cuenta de aquí adelante
de decir los que convengan a la gravedad de mi cargo, que en casa llena
presto se guisa la cena, y quien destaja no baraja, y a buen salvo está el
que repica, y el dar y el tener seso ha menester.

-¡Eso sí, Sancho! -dijo don Quijote-: ¡encaja, ensarta, enhila refranes,
que nadie te va a la mano! ¡Castígame mi madre, y yo trómpogelas! Estoyte
diciendo que escuses refranes, y en un instante has echado aquí una letanía
dellos, que así cuadran con lo que vamos tratando como por los cerros de
Úbeda. Mira, Sancho, no te digo yo que parece mal un refrán traído a
propósito, pero cargar y ensartar refranes a troche moche hace la plática
desmayada y baja. Cuando subieres a caballo, no vayas echando el cuerpo
sobre el arzón postrero, ni lleves las piernas tiesas y tiradas y desviadas
de la barriga del caballo, ni tampoco vayas tan flojo que parezca que vas
sobre el rucio: que el andar a caballo a unos hace caballeros; a otros,
caballerizos. Sea moderado tu sueño, que el que no madruga con el sol, no
goza del día; y advierte, ¡oh Sancho!, que la diligencia es madre de la
buena ventura, y la pereza, su contraria, jamás llegó al término que pide
un buen deseo. Este último consejo que ahora darte quiero, puesto que no
sirva para adorno del cuerpo, quiero que le lleves muy en la memoria, que
creo que no te será de menos provecho que los que hasta aquí te he dado; y
es que jamás te pongas a disputar de linajes, a lo menos, comparándolos
entre sí, pues, por fuerza, en los que se comparan uno ha de ser el mejor,
y del que abatieres serás aborrecido, y del que levantares en ninguna
manera premiado. Tu vestido será calza entera, ropilla larga, herreruelo un
poco más largo; greguescos, ni por pienso, que no les están bien ni a los
caballeros ni a los gobernadores. Por ahora, esto se me ha ofrecido,
Sancho, que aconsejarte; andará el tiempo, y, según las ocasiones, así
serán mis documentos, como tú tengas cuidado de avisarme el estado en que
te hallares.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, bien veo que todo cuanto vuestra merced me ha
dicho son cosas buenas, santas y provechosas, pero ¿de qué han de servir,
si de ninguna me acuerdo? Verdad sea que aquello de no dejarme crecer las
uñas y de casarme otra vez, si se ofreciere, no se me pasará del magín,
pero esotros badulaques y enredos y revoltillos, no se me acuerda ni
acordará más dellos que de las nubes de antaño, y así, será menester que se
me den por escrito, que, puesto que no sé leer ni escribir, yo se los daré
a mi confesor para que me los encaje y recapacite cuando fuere menester.

-¡Ah, pecador de mí -respondió don Quijote-, y qué mal parece en los
gobernadores el no saber leer ni escribir!; porque has de saber, ¡oh
Sancho!, que no saber un hombre leer, o ser zurdo, arguye una de dos cosas:
o que fue hijo de padres demasiado de humildes y bajos, o él tan travieso
y malo que no pudo entrar en el buen uso ni la buena doctrina. Gran falta
es la que llevas contigo, y así, querría que aprendieses a firmar siquiera.

-Bien sé firmar mi nombre -respondió Sancho-, que cuando fui prioste en mi
lugar, aprendí a hacer unas letras como de marca de fardo, que decían que
decía mi nombre; cuanto más, que fingiré que tengo tullida la mano derecha,
y haré que firme otro por mí; que para todo hay remedio, si no es para la
muerte; y, teniendo yo el mando y el palo, haré lo que quisiere; cuanto
más, que el que tiene el padre alcalde... Y, siendo yo gobernador, que es
más que ser alcalde, ¡llegaos, que la dejan ver! No, sino popen y
calóñenme, que vendrán por lana y volverán trasquilados; y a quien Dios
quiere bien, la casa le sabe; y las necedades del rico por sentencias pasan
en el mundo; y, siéndolo yo, siendo gobernador y juntamente liberal, como
lo pienso ser, no habrá falta que se me parezca. No, sino haceos miel, y
paparos han moscas; tanto vales cuanto tienes, decía una mi agüela, y del
hombre arraigado no te verás vengado.

-¡Oh, maldito seas de Dios, Sancho! -dijo a esta sazón don Quijote-.
¡Sesenta mil satanases te lleven a ti y a tus refranes! Una hora ha que los
estás ensartando y dándome con cada uno tragos de tormento. Yo te aseguro
que estos refranes te han de llevar un día a la horca; por ellos te han de
quitar el gobierno tus vasallos, o ha de haber entre ellos comunidades.
Dime, ¿dónde los hallas, ignorante, o cómo los aplicas, mentecato, que para
decir yo uno y aplicarle bien, sudo y trabajo como si cavase?

-Por Dios, señor nuestro amo -replicó Sancho-, que vuesa merced se queja de
bien pocas cosas. ¿A qué diablos se pudre de que yo me sirva de mi
hacienda, que ninguna otra tengo, ni otro caudal alguno, sino refranes y
más refranes? Y ahora se me ofrecen cuatro que venían aquí pintiparados, o
como peras en tabaque, pero no los diré, porque al buen callar llaman
Sancho.

-Ese Sancho no eres tú -dijo don Quijote-, porque no sólo no eres buen
callar, sino mal hablar y mal porfiar; y, con todo eso, querría saber qué
cuatro refranes te ocurrían ahora a la memoria que venían aquí a propósito,
que yo ando recorriendo la mía, que la tengo buena, y ninguno se me ofrece.

-¿Qué mejores -dijo Sancho- que "entre dos muelas cordales nunca pongas tus
pulgares", y "a idos de mi casa y qué queréis con mi mujer, no hay
responder", y "si da el cántaro en la piedra o la piedra en el cántaro, mal
para el cántaro", todos los cuales vienen a pelo? Que nadie se tome con su
gobernador ni con el que le manda, porque saldrá lastimado, como el que
pone el dedo entre dos muelas cordales, y aunque no sean cordales, como
sean muelas, no importa; y a lo que dijere el gobernador no hay que
replicar, como al "salíos de mi casa y qué queréis con mi mujer". Pues lo
de la piedra en el cántaro un ciego lo verá. Así que, es menester que el
que vee la mota en el ojo ajeno, vea la viga en el suyo, porque no se diga
por él: "espantóse la muerta de la degollada", y vuestra merced sabe bien
que más sabe el necio en su casa que el cuerdo en la ajena.

-Eso no, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que el necio en su casa ni en la
ajena sabe nada, a causa que sobre el aumento de la necedad no asienta
ningún discreto edificio. Y dejemos esto aquí, Sancho, que si mal
gobernares, tuya será la culpa, y mía la vergüenza; mas consuélome que he
hecho lo que debía en aconsejarte con las veras y con la discreción a mí
posible: con esto salgo de mi obligación y de mi promesa. Dios te guíe,
Sancho, y te gobierne en tu gobierno, y a mí me saque del escrúpulo que me
queda que has de dar con toda la ínsula patas arriba, cosa que pudiera yo
escusar con descubrir al duque quién eres, diciéndole que toda esa gordura
y esa personilla que tienes no es otra cosa que un costal lleno de refranes
y de malicias.

-Señor -replicó Sancho-, si a vuestra merced le parece que no soy de pro
para este gobierno, desde aquí le suelto, que más quiero un solo negro de
la uña de mi alma que a todo mi cuerpo; y así me sustentaré Sancho a secas
con pan y cebolla, como gobernador con perdices y capones; y más que,
mientras se duerme, todos son iguales, los grandes y los menores, los
pobres y los ricos; y si vuestra merced mira en ello, verá que sólo vuestra
merced me ha puesto en esto de gobernar: que yo no sé más de gobiernos de
ínsulas que un buitre; y si se imagina que por ser gobernador me ha de
llevar el diablo, más me quiero ir Sancho al cielo que gobernador al
infierno.

-Por Dios, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que, por solas estas últimas razones
que has dicho, juzgo que mereces ser gobernador de mil ínsulas: buen
natural tienes, sin el cual no hay ciencia que valga; encomiéndate a Dios,
y procura no errar en la primera intención; quiero decir que siempre tengas
intento y firme propósito de acertar en cuantos negocios te ocurrieren,
porque siempre favorece el cielo los buenos deseos. Y vámonos a comer, que
creo que ya estos señores nos aguardan.





Capítulo XLIV. Cómo Sancho Panza fue llevado al gobierno, y de la estraña
aventura que en el castillo sucedió a don Quijote


Dicen que en el propio original desta historia se lee que, llegando Cide
Hamete a escribir este capítulo, no le tradujo su intérprete como él le
había escrito, que fue un modo de queja que tuvo el moro de sí mismo, por
haber tomado entre manos una historia tan seca y tan limitada como esta de
don Quijote, por parecerle que siempre había de hablar dél y de Sancho, sin
osar estenderse a otras digresiones y episodios más graves y más
entretenidos; y decía que el ir siempre atenido el entendimiento, la mano y
la pluma a escribir de un solo sujeto y hablar por las bocas de pocas
personas era un trabajo incomportable, cuyo fruto no redundaba en el de su
autor, y que, por huir deste inconveniente, había usado en la primera parte
del artificio de algunas novelas, como fueron la del Curioso impertinente y
la del Capitán cautivo, que están como separadas de la historia, puesto que
las demás que allí se cuentan son casos sucedidos al mismo don Quijote, que
no podían dejar de escribirse. También pensó, como él dice, que muchos,
llevados de la atención que piden las hazañas de don Quijote, no la darían
a las novelas, y pasarían por ellas, o con priesa o con enfado, sin
advertir la gala y artificio que en sí contienen, el cual se mostrara bien
al descubierto cuando, por sí solas, sin arrimarse a las locuras de don
Quijote ni a las sandeces de Sancho, salieran a luz. Y así, en esta segunda
parte no quiso ingerir novelas sueltas ni pegadizas, sino algunos episodios
que lo pareciesen, nacidos de los mesmos sucesos que la verdad ofrece; y
aun éstos, limitadamente y con solas las palabras que bastan a
declararlos; y, pues se contiene y cierra en los estrechos límites de la
narración, teniendo habilidad, suficiencia y entendimiento para tratar del
universo todo, pide no se desprecie su trabajo, y se le den alabanzas, no
por lo que escribe, sino por lo que ha dejado de escribir.

Y luego prosigue la historia diciendo que, en acabando de comer don
Quijote, el día que dio los consejos a Sancho, aquella tarde se los dio
escritos, para que él buscase quien se los leyese; pero, apenas se los hubo
dado, cuando se le cayeron y vinieron a manos del duque, que los comunicó
con la duquesa, y los dos se admiraron de nuevo de la locura y del ingenio
de don Quijote; y así, llevando adelante sus burlas, aquella tarde enviaron
a Sancho con mucho acompañamiento al lugar que para él había de ser ínsula.

Acaeció, pues, que el que le llevaba a cargo era un mayordomo del duque,
muy discreto y muy gracioso -que no puede haber gracia donde no hay
discreción-, el cual había hecho la persona de la condesa Trifaldi, con el
donaire que queda referido; y con esto, y con ir industriado de sus
señores de cómo se había de haber con Sancho, salió con su intento
maravillosamente. Digo, pues, que acaeció que, así como Sancho vio al tal
mayordomo, se le figuró en su rostro el mesmo de la Trifaldi, y,
volviéndose a su señor, le dijo:

-Señor, o a mí me ha de llevar el diablo de aquí de donde estoy, en justo
y en creyente, o vuestra merced me ha de confesar que el rostro deste
mayordomo del duque, que aquí está, es el mesmo de la Dolorida.

Miró don Quijote atentamente al mayordomo, y, habiéndole mirado, dijo a
Sancho:

-No hay para qué te lleve el diablo, Sancho, ni en justo ni en creyente,
que no sé lo que quieres decir; que el rostro de la Dolorida es el del
mayordomo, pero no por eso el mayordomo es la Dolorida; que, a serlo,
implicaría contradición muy grande, y no es tiempo ahora de hacer estas
averiguaciones, que sería entrarnos en intricados laberintos. Créeme,
amigo, que es menester rogar a Nuestro Señor muy de veras que nos libre a
los dos de malos hechiceros y de malos encantadores.

-No es burla, señor -replicó Sancho-, sino que denantes le oí hablar, y no
pareció sino que la voz de la Trifaldi me sonaba en los oídos. Ahora bien,
yo callaré, pero no dejaré de andar advertido de aquí adelante, a ver si
descubre otra señal que confirme o desfaga mi sospecha.

-Así lo has de hacer, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, y darásme aviso de todo lo
que en este caso descubrieres y de todo aquello que en el gobierno te
sucediere.

Salió, en fin, Sancho, acompañado de mucha gente, vestido a lo letrado, y
encima un gabán muy ancho de chamelote de aguas leonado, con una montera de
lo mesmo, sobre un macho a la jineta, y detrás dél, por orden del duque,
iba el rucio con jaeces y ornamentos jumentiles de seda y flamantes. Volvía
Sancho la cabeza de cuando en cuando a mirar a su asno, con cuya compañía
iba tan contento que no se trocara con el emperador de Alemaña.

Al despedirse de los duques, les besó las manos, y tomó la bendición de su
señor, que se la dio con lágrimas, y Sancho la recibió con pucheritos.

Deja, lector amable, ir en paz y en hora buena al buen Sancho, y espera dos
fanegas de risa, que te ha de causar el saber cómo se portó en su cargo, y,
en tanto, atiende a saber lo que le pasó a su amo aquella noche; que si con
ello no rieres, por lo menos desplegarás los labios con risa de jimia,
porque los sucesos de don Quijote, o se han de celebrar con admiración, o
con risa.

Cuéntase, pues, que, apenas se hubo partido Sancho, cuando don Quijote
sintió su soledad; y si le fuera posible revocarle la comisión y quitarle
el gobierno, lo hiciera. Conoció la duquesa su melancolía, y preguntóle que
de qué estaba triste; que si era por la ausencia de Sancho, que escuderos,
dueñas y doncellas había en su casa que le servirían muy a satisfación de
su deseo.

-Verdad es, señora mía -respondió don Quijote-, que siento la ausencia de
Sancho, pero no es ésa la causa principal que me hace parecer que estoy
triste, y, de los muchos ofrecimientos que vuestra excelencia me hace,
solamente acepto y escojo el de la voluntad con que se me hacen, y, en lo
demás, suplico a Vuestra Excelencia que dentro de mi aposento consienta y
permita que yo solo sea el que me sirva.

-En verdad -dijo la duquesa-, señor don Quijote, que no ha de ser así: que
le han de servir cuatro doncellas de las mías, hermosas como unas flores.

-Para mí -respondió don Quijote- no serán ellas como flores, sino como
espinas que me puncen el alma. Así entrarán ellas en mi aposento, ni cosa
que lo parezca, como volar. Si es que vuestra grandeza quiere llevar
adelante el hacerme merced sin yo merecerla, déjeme que yo me las haya
conmigo, y que yo me sirva de mis puertas adentro, que yo ponga una muralla
en medio de mis deseos y de mi honestidad; y no quiero perder esta
costumbre por la liberalidad que vuestra alteza quiere mostrar conmigo. Y,
en resolución, antes dormiré vestido que consentir que nadie me desnude.

-No más, no más, señor don Quijote -replicó la duquesa-. Por mí digo que
daré orden que ni aun una mosca entre en su estancia, no que una doncella;
no soy yo persona, que por mí se ha de descabalar la decencia del señor don
Quijote; que, según se me ha traslucido, la que más campea entre sus muchas
virtudes es la de la honestidad. Desnúdese vuesa merced y vístase a sus
solas y a su modo, como y cuando quisiere, que no habrá quien lo impida,
pues dentro de su aposento hallará los vasos necesarios al menester del que
duerme a puerta cerrada, porque ninguna natural necesidad le obligue a que
la abra. Viva mil siglos la gran Dulcinea del Toboso, y sea su nombre
estendido por toda la redondez de la tierra, pues mereció ser amada de tan
valiente y tan honesto caballero, y los benignos cielos infundan en el
corazón de Sancho Panza, nuestro gobernador, un deseo de acabar presto sus
diciplinas, para que vuelva a gozar el mundo de la belleza de tan gran
señora.

A lo cual dijo don Quijote:

-Vuestra altitud ha hablado como quien es, que en la boca de las buenas
señoras no ha de haber ninguna que sea mala; y más venturosa y más conocida
será en el mundo Dulcinea por haberla alabado vuestra grandeza, que por
todas las alabanzas que puedan darle los más elocuentes de la tierra.

-Agora bien, señor don Quijote -replicó la duquesa-, la hora de cenar se
llega, y el duque debe de esperar: venga vuesa merced y cenemos, y
acostaráse temprano, que el viaje que ayer hizo de Candaya no fue tan corto
que no haya causado algún molimiento.

-No siento ninguno, señora -respondió don Quijote-, porque osaré jurar a
Vuestra Excelencia que en mi vida he subido sobre bestia más reposada ni de
mejor paso que Clavileño; y no sé yo qué le pudo mover a Malambruno para
deshacerse de tan ligera y tan gentil cabalgadura, y abrasarla así, sin más
ni más.

-A eso se puede imaginar -respondió la duquesa- que, arrepentido del mal
que había hecho a la Trifaldi y compañía, y a otras personas, y de las
maldades que como hechicero y encantador debía de haber cometido, quiso
concluir con todos los instrumentos de su oficio, y, como a principal y que
más le traía desasosegado, vagando de tierra en tierra, abrasó a Clavileño;
que con sus abrasadas cenizas y con el trofeo del cartel queda eterno el
valor del gran don Quijote de la Mancha.

De nuevo nuevas gracias dio don Quijote a la duquesa, y, en cenando, don
Quijote se retiró en su aposento solo, sin consentir que nadie entrase con
él a servirle: tanto se temía de encontrar ocasiones que le moviesen o
forzasen a perder el honesto decoro que a su señora Dulcinea guardaba,
siempre puesta en la imaginación la bondad de Amadís, flor y espejo de los
andantes caballeros. Cerró tras sí la puerta, y a la luz de dos velas de
cera se desnudó, y al descalzarse -¡oh desgracia indigna de tal persona!-
se le soltaron, no suspiros, ni otra cosa, que desacreditasen la limpieza
de su policía, sino hasta dos docenas de puntos de una media, que quedó
hecha celosía. Afligióse en estremo el buen señor, y diera él por tener
allí un adarme de seda verde una onza de plata; digo seda verde porque las
medias eran verdes.

Aquí exclamó Benengeli, y, escribiendo, dijo ''¡Oh pobreza, pobreza! ¡No sé
yo con qué razón se movió aquel gran poeta cordobés a llamarte

dádiva santa desagradecida!

Yo, aunque moro, bien sé, por la comunicación que he tenido con cristianos,
que la santidad consiste en la caridad, humildad, fee, obediencia y
pobreza; pero, con todo eso, digo que ha de tener mucho de Dios el que se
viniere a contentar con ser pobre, si no es de aquel modo de pobreza de
quien dice uno de sus mayores santos: "Tened todas las cosas como si no las
tuviésedes"; y a esto llaman pobreza de espíritu; pero tú, segunda pobreza,
que eres de la que yo hablo, ¿por qué quieres estrellarte con los hidalgos
y bien nacidos más que con la otra gente? ¿Por qué los obligas a dar
pantalia a los zapatos, y a que los botones de sus ropillas unos sean de
seda, otros de cerdas, y otros de vidro? ¿Por qué sus cuellos, por la mayor
parte, han de ser siempre escarolados, y no abiertos con molde?'' Y en esto
se echará de ver que es antiguo el uso del almidón y de los cuellos
abiertos. Y prosiguió: ''¡Miserable del bien nacido que va dando pistos a
su honra, comiendo mal y a puerta cerrada, haciendo hipócrita al palillo de
dientes con que sale a la calle después de no haber comido cosa que le
obligue a limpiárselos! ¡Miserable de aquel, digo, que tiene la honra
espantadiza, y piensa que desde una legua se le descubre el remiendo del
zapato, el trasudor del sombrero, la hilaza del herreruelo y la hambre de
su estómago!''

Todo esto se le renovó a don Quijote en la soltura de sus puntos, pero
consolóse con ver que Sancho le había dejado unas botas de camino, que
pensó ponerse otro día. Finalmente, él se recostó pensativo y pesaroso, así
de la falta que Sancho le hacía como de la inreparable desgracia de sus
medias, a quien tomara los puntos, aunque fuera con seda de otra color, que
es una de las mayores señales de miseria que un hidalgo puede dar en el
discurso de su prolija estrecheza. Mató las velas; hacía calor y no podía
dormir; levantóse del lecho y abrió un poco la ventana de una reja que daba
sobre un hermoso jardín, y, al abrirla, sintió y oyó que andaba y hablaba
gente en el jardín. Púsose a escuchar atentamente. Levantaron la voz los de
abajo, tanto, que pudo oír estas razones:

-No me porfíes, ¡oh Emerencia!, que cante, pues sabes que, desde el punto
que este forastero entró en este castillo y mis ojos le miraron, yo no sé
cantar, sino llorar; cuanto más, que el sueño de mi señora tiene más de
ligero que de pesado, y no querría que nos hallase aquí por todo el tesoro
del mundo. Y, puesto caso que durmiese y no despertase, en vano sería mi
canto si duerme y no despierta para oírle este nuevo Eneas, que ha llegado
a mis regiones para dejarme escarnida.

-No des en eso, Altisidora amiga -respondieron-, que sin duda la duquesa y
cuantos hay en esa casa duermen, si no es el señor de tu corazón y el
despertador de tu alma, porque ahora sentí que abría la ventana de la reja
de su estancia, y sin duda debe de estar despierto; canta, lastimada mía,
en tono bajo y suave al son de tu arpa, y, cuando la duquesa nos sienta, le
echaremos la culpa al calor que hace.

-No está en eso el punto, ¡oh Emerencia! -respondió la Altisidora-, sino en
que no querría que mi canto descubriese mi corazón y fuese juzgada de los
que no tienen noticia de las fuerzas poderosas de amor por doncella
antojadiza y liviana. Pero venga lo que viniere, que más vale vergüenza en
cara que mancilla en corazón.

Y, en esto, sintió tocar una arpa suavísimamente. Oyendo lo cual, quedó don
Quijote pasmado, porque en aquel instante se le vinieron a la memoria las
infinitas aventuras semejantes a aquélla, de ventanas, rejas y jardines,
músicas, requiebros y desvanecimientos que en los sus desvanecidos libros
de caballerías había leído. Luego imaginó que alguna doncella de la duquesa
estaba dél enamorada, y que la honestidad la forzaba a tener secreta su
voluntad; temió no le rindiese, y propuso en su pensamiento el no dejarse
vencer; y, encomendándose de todo buen ánimo y buen talante a su señora
Dulcinea del Toboso, determinó de escuchar la música; y, para dar a
entender que allí estaba, dio un fingido estornudo, de que no poco se
alegraron las doncellas, que otra cosa no deseaban sino que don Quijote las
oyese. Recorrida, pues, y afinada la arpa, Altisidora dio principio a este
romance:

   -¡Oh, tú, que estás en tu lecho,
   entre sábanas de holanda,
   durmiendo a pierna tendida
   de la noche a la mañana,
   caballero el más valiente
   que ha producido la Mancha,
   más honesto y más bendito
   que el oro fino de Arabia!
   Oye a una triste doncella,
   bien crecida y mal lograda,
   que en la luz de tus dos soles
   se siente abrasar el alma.
   Tú buscas tus aventuras,
   y ajenas desdichas hallas;
   das las feridas, y niegas
   el remedio de sanarlas.
   Dime, valeroso joven,
   que Dios prospere tus ansias,
   si te criaste en la Libia,
   o en las montañas de Jaca;
   si sierpes te dieron leche;
   si, a dicha, fueron tus amas
   la aspereza de las selvas
   y el horror de las montañas.
   Muy bien puede Dulcinea,
   doncella rolliza y sana,
   preciarse de que ha rendido
   a una tigre y fiera brava.
   Por esto será famosa
   desde Henares a Jarama,
   desde el Tajo a Manzanares,
   desde Pisuerga hasta Arlanza.
   Trocáreme yo por ella,
   y diera encima una saya
   de las más gayadas mías,
   que de oro le adornan franjas.
   ¡Oh, quién se viera en tus brazos,
   o si no, junto a tu cama,
   rascándote la cabeza
   y matándote la caspa!
   Mucho pido, y no soy digna
   de merced tan señalada:
   los pies quisiera traerte,
   que a una humilde esto le basta.
   ¡Oh, qué de cofias te diera,
   qué de escarpines de plata,
   qué de calzas de damasco,
   qué de herreruelos de holanda!
   ¡Qué de finísimas perlas,
   cada cual como una agalla,
   que, a no tener compañeras,
   Las solas fueran llamadas!
   No mires de tu Tarpeya
   este incendio que me abrasa,
   Nerón manchego del mundo,
   ni le avives con tu saña.
   Niña soy, pulcela tierna,
   mi edad de quince no pasa:
   catorce tengo y tres meses,
   te juro en Dios y en mi ánima.
   No soy renca, ni soy coja,
   ni tengo nada de manca;
   los cabellos, como lirios,
   que, en pie, por el suelo arrastran.
   Y, aunque es mi boca aguileña
   y la nariz algo chata,
   ser mis dientes de topacios
   mi belleza al cielo ensalza.
   Mi voz, ya ves, si me escuchas,
   que a la que es más dulce iguala,
   y soy de disposición
   algo menos que mediana.
   Estas y otras gracias mías,
   son despojos de tu aljaba;
   desta casa soy doncella,
   y Altisidora me llaman.

Aquí dio fin el canto de la malferida Altisidora, y comenzó el asombro del
requirido don Quijote, el cual, dando un gran suspiro, dijo entre sí:

-¡Que tengo de ser tan desdichado andante, que no ha de haber doncella que
me mire que de mí no se enamore...! ¡Que tenga de ser tan corta de ventura
la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, que no la han de dejar a solas gozar de la
incomparable firmeza mía...! ¿Qué la queréis, reinas? ¿A qué la perseguís,
emperatrices? ¿Para qué la acosáis, doncellas de a catorce a quince años?
Dejad, dejad a la miserable que triunfe, se goce y ufane con la suerte que
Amor quiso darle en rendirle mi corazón y entregarle mi alma. Mirad,
caterva enamorada, que para sola Dulcinea soy de masa y de alfenique, y
para todas las demás soy de pedernal; para ella soy miel, y para vosotras
acíbar; para mí sola Dulcinea es la hermosa, la discreta, la honesta, la
gallarda y la bien nacida, y las demás, las feas, las necias, las livianas
y las de peor linaje; para ser yo suyo, y no de otra alguna, me arrojó la
naturaleza al mundo. Llore o cante Altisidora; desespérese Madama, por
quien me aporrearon en el castillo del moro encantado, que yo tengo de ser
de Dulcinea, cocido o asado, limpio, bien criado y honesto, a pesar de
todas las potestades hechiceras de la tierra.

Y, con esto, cerró de golpe la ventana, y, despechado y pesaroso, como si
le hubiera acontecido alguna gran desgracia, se acostó en su lecho, donde
le dejaremos por ahora, porque nos está llamando el gran Sancho Panza, que
quiere dar principio a su famoso gobierno.





Capítulo XLV. De cómo el gran Sancho Panza tomó la posesión de su ínsula, y
del modo que comenzó a gobernar


¡Oh perpetuo descubridor de los antípodas, hacha del mundo, ojo del cielo,
meneo dulce de las cantimploras, Timbrio aquí, Febo allí, tirador acá,
médico acullá, padre de la Poesía, inventor de la Música: tú que siempre
sales, y, aunque lo parece, nunca te pones! A ti digo, ¡oh sol, con cuya
ayuda el hombre engendra al hombre!; a ti digo que me favorezcas, y
alumbres la escuridad de mi ingenio, para que pueda discurrir por sus
puntos en la narración del gobierno del gran Sancho Panza; que sin ti, yo
me siento tibio, desmazalado y confuso.

Digo, pues, que con todo su acompañamiento llegó Sancho a un lugar de hasta
mil vecinos, que era de los mejores que el duque tenía. Diéronle a entender
que se llamaba la ínsula Barataria, o ya porque el lugar se llamaba
Baratario, o ya por el barato con que se le había dado el gobierno. Al
llegar a las puertas de la villa, que era cercada, salió el regimiento del
pueblo a recebirle; tocaron las campanas, y todos los vecinos dieron
muestras de general alegría, y con mucha pompa le llevaron a la iglesia
mayor a dar gracias a Dios, y luego, con algunas ridículas ceremonias, le
entregaron las llaves del pueblo, y le admitieron por perpetuo gobernador
de la ínsula Barataria.

El traje, las barbas, la gordura y pequeñez del nuevo gobernador tenía
admirada a toda la gente que el busilis del cuento no sabía, y aun a todos
los que lo sabían, que eran muchos. Finalmente, en sacándole de la iglesia,
le llevaron a la silla del juzgado y le sentaron en ella; y el mayordomo
del duque le dijo:

-Es costumbre antigua en esta ínsula, señor gobernador, que el que viene a
tomar posesión desta famosa ínsula está obligado a responder a una pregunta
que se le hiciere, que sea algo intricada y dificultosa, de cuya respuesta
el pueblo toma y toca el pulso del ingenio de su nuevo gobernador; y así, o
se alegra o se entristece con su venida.

En tanto que el mayordomo decía esto a Sancho, estaba él mirando unas
grandes y muchas letras que en la pared frontera de su silla estaban
escritas; y, como él no sabía leer, preguntó que qué eran aquellas pinturas
que en aquella pared estaban. Fuele respondido:

-Señor, allí esta escrito y notado el día en que Vuestra Señoría tomó
posesión desta ínsula, y dice el epitafio: Hoy día, a tantos de tal mes y
de tal año, tomó la posesión desta ínsula el señor don Sancho Panza, que
muchos años la goce.

-Y ¿a quién llaman don Sancho Panza? -preguntó Sancho.

-A vuestra señoría -respondió el mayordomo-, que en esta ínsula no ha
entrado otro Panza sino el que está sentado en esa silla.

-Pues advertid, hermano -dijo Sancho-, que yo no tengo don, ni en todo mi
linaje le ha habido: Sancho Panza me llaman a secas, y Sancho se llamó mi
padre, y Sancho mi agüelo, y todos fueron Panzas, sin añadiduras de dones
ni donas; y yo imagino que en esta ínsula debe de haber más dones que
piedras; pero basta: Dios me entiende, y podrá ser que, si el gobierno me
dura cuatro días, yo escardaré estos dones, que, por la muchedumbre, deben
de enfadar como los mosquitos. Pase adelante con su pregunta el señor
mayordomo, que yo responderé lo mejor que supiere, ora se entristezca o no
se entristezca el pueblo.

A este instante entraron en el juzgado dos hombres, el uno vestido de
labrador y el otro de sastre, porque traía unas tijeras en la mano, y el
sastre dijo:

-Señor gobernador, yo y este hombre labrador venimos ante vuestra merced en
razón que este buen hombre llegó a mi tienda ayer (que yo, con perdón de
los presentes, soy sastre examinado, que Dios sea bendito), y, poniéndome
un pedazo de paño en las manos, me preguntó: ''Señor, ¿habría en esto
paño harto para hacerme una caperuza?'' Yo, tanteando el paño, le respondí
que sí; él debióse de imaginar, a lo que yo imagino, e imaginé bien, que
sin duda yo le quería hurtar alguna parte del paño, fundándose en su
malicia y en la mala opinión de los sastres, y replicóme que mirase si
habría para dos; adivinéle el pensamiento y díjele que sí; y él, caballero
en su dañada y primera intención, fue añadiendo caperuzas, y yo añadiendo
síes, hasta que llegamos a cinco caperuzas, y ahora en este punto acaba de
venir por ellas: yo se las doy, y no me quiere pagar la hechura, antes me
pide que le pague o vuelva su paño.

-¿Es todo esto así, hermano? -preguntó Sancho.

-Sí, señor -respondió el hombre-, pero hágale vuestra merced que muestre
las cinco caperuzas que me ha hecho.

-De buena gana -respondió el sastre.

Y, sacando encontinente la mano debajo del herreruelo, mostró en ella cinco
caperuzas puestas en las cinco cabezas de los dedos de la mano, y dijo:

-He aquí las cinco caperuzas que este buen hombre me pide, y en Dios y en
mi conciencia que no me ha quedado nada del paño, y yo daré la obra a vista
de veedores del oficio.

Todos los presentes se rieron de la multitud de las caperuzas y del nuevo
pleito. Sancho se puso a considerar un poco, y dijo:

-Paréceme que en este pleito no ha de haber largas dilaciones, sino juzgar
luego a juicio de buen varón; y así, yo doy por sentencia que el sastre
pierda las hechuras, y el labrador el paño, y las caperuzas se lleven a los
presos de la cárcel, y no haya más.

Si la sentencia pasada de la bolsa del ganadero movió a admiración a los
circunstantes, ésta les provocó a risa; pero, en fin, se hizo lo que mandó
el gobernador; ante el cual se presentaron dos hombres ancianos; el uno
traía una cañaheja por báculo, y el sin báculo dijo:

-Señor, a este buen hombre le presté días ha diez escudos de oro en oro,
por hacerle placer y buena obra, con condición que me los volviese cuando
se los pidiese; pasáronse muchos días sin pedírselos, por no ponerle en
mayor necesidad de volvérmelos que la que él tenía cuando yo se los presté;
pero, por parecerme que se descuidaba en la paga, se los he pedido una y
muchas veces, y no solamente no me los vuelve, pero me los niega y dice que
nunca tales diez escudos le presté, y que si se los presté, que ya me los
ha vuelto. Yo no tengo testigos ni del prestado ni de la vuelta, porque no
me los ha vuelto; querría que vuestra merced le tomase juramento, y si
jurare que me los ha vuelto, yo se los perdono para aquí y para delante de
Dios.

-¿Qué decís vos a esto, buen viejo del báculo? -dijo Sancho.

A lo que dijo el viejo:

-Yo, señor, confieso que me los prestó, y baje vuestra merced esa vara; y,
pues él lo deja en mi juramento, yo juraré como se los he vuelto y pagado
real y verdaderamente.

Bajó el gobernador la vara, y, en tanto, el viejo del báculo dio el báculo
al otro viejo, que se le tuviese en tanto que juraba, como si le embarazara
mucho, y luego puso la mano en la cruz de la vara, diciendo que era verdad
que se le habían prestado aquellos diez escudos que se le pedían; pero que
él se los había vuelto de su mano a la suya, y que por no caer en ello se
los volvía a pedir por momentos. Viendo lo cual el gran gobernador,
preguntó al acreedor qué respondía a lo que decía su contrario; y dijo que
sin duda alguna su deudor debía de decir verdad, porque le tenía por hombre
de bien y buen cristiano, y que a él se le debía de haber olvidado el cómo
y cuándo se los había vuelto, y que desde allí en adelante jamás le pidiría
nada. Tornó a tomar su báculo el deudor, y, bajando la cabeza, se salió del
juzgado. Visto lo cual Sancho, y que sin más ni más se iba, y viendo
también la paciencia del demandante, inclinó la cabeza sobre el pecho, y,
poniéndose el índice de la mano derecha sobre las cejas y las narices,
estuvo como pensativo un pequeño espacio, y luego alzó la cabeza y mandó
que le llamasen al viejo del báculo, que ya se había ido. Trujéronsele, y,
en viéndole Sancho, le dijo:

-Dadme, buen hombre, ese báculo, que le he menester.

-De muy buena gana -respondió el viejo-: hele aquí, señor.

Y púsosele en la mano. Tomóle Sancho, y, dándosele al otro viejo, le dijo:

-Andad con Dios, que ya vais pagado.

-¿Yo, señor? -respondió el viejo-. Pues, ¿vale esta cañaheja diez escudos
de oro?

-Sí -dijo el gobernador-; o si no, yo soy el mayor porro del mundo. Y ahora
se verá si tengo yo caletre para gobernar todo un reino.

Y mandó que allí, delante de todos, se rompiese y abriese la caña. Hízose
así, y en el corazón della hallaron diez escudos en oro. Quedaron todos
admirados, y tuvieron a su gobernador por un nuevo Salomón.

Preguntáronle de dónde había colegido que en aquella cañaheja estaban
aquellos diez escudos, y respondió que de haberle visto dar el viejo que
juraba, a su contrario, aquel báculo, en tanto que hacía el juramento, y
jurar que se los había dado real y verdaderamente, y que, en acabando de
jurar, le tornó a pedir el báculo, le vino a la imaginación que dentro dél
estaba la paga de lo que pedían. De donde se podía colegir que los que
gobiernan, aunque sean unos tontos, tal vez los encamina Dios en sus
juicios; y más, que él había oído contar otro caso como aquél al cura de su
lugar, y que él tenía tan gran memoria, que, a no olvidársele todo aquello
de que quería acordarse, no hubiera tal memoria en toda la ínsula.
Finalmente, el un viejo corrido y el otro pagado, se fueron, y los
presentes quedaron admirados, y el que escribía las palabras, hechos y
movimientos de Sancho no acababa de determinarse si le tendría y pondría
por tonto o por discreto.

Luego, acabado este pleito, entró en el juzgado una mujer asida fuertemente
de un hombre vestido de ganadero rico, la cual venía dando grandes voces,
diciendo:

-¡Justicia, señor gobernador, justicia, y si no la hallo en la tierra, la
iré a buscar al cielo! Señor gobernador de mi ánima, este mal hombre me ha
cogido en la mitad dese campo, y se ha aprovechado de mi cuerpo como si
fuera trapo mal lavado, y, ¡desdichada de mí!, me ha llevado lo que yo
tenía guardado más de veinte y tres años ha, defendiéndolo de moros y
cristianos, de naturales y estranjeros; y yo, siempre dura como un
alcornoque, conservándome entera como la salamanquesa en el fuego, o como
la lana entre las zarzas, para que este buen hombre llegase ahora con sus
manos limpias a manosearme.

-Aun eso está por averiguar: si tiene limpias o no las manos este galán
-dijo Sancho.

Y, volviéndose al hombre, le dijo qué decía y respondía a la querella de
aquella mujer. El cual, todo turbado, respondió:

-Señores, yo soy un pobre ganadero de ganado de cerda, y esta mañana salía
deste lugar de vender, con perdón sea dicho, cuatro puercos, que me
llevaron de alcabalas y socaliñas poco menos de lo que ellos valían;
volvíame a mi aldea, topé en el camino a esta buena dueña, y el diablo, que
todo lo añasca y todo lo cuece, hizo que yogásemos juntos; paguéle lo
soficiente, y ella, mal contenta, asió de mí, y no me ha dejado hasta
traerme a este puesto. Dice que la forcé, y miente, para el juramento que
hago o pienso hacer; y ésta es toda la verdad, sin faltar meaja.

Entonces el gobernador le preguntó si traía consigo algún dinero en plata;
él dijo que hasta veinte ducados tenía en el seno, en una bolsa de cuero.
Mandó que la sacase y se la entregase, así como estaba, a la querellante;
él lo hizo temblando; tomóla la mujer, y, haciendo mil zalemas a todos y
rogando a Dios por la vida y salud del señor gobernador, que así miraba por
las huérfanas menesterosas y doncellas; y con esto se salió del juzgado,
llevando la bolsa asida con entrambas manos, aunque primero miró si era de
plata la moneda que llevaba dentro.

Apenas salió, cuando Sancho dijo al ganadero, que ya se le saltaban las
lágrimas, y los ojos y el corazón se iban tras su bolsa:

-Buen hombre, id tras aquella mujer y quitadle la bolsa, aunque no quiera,
y volved aquí con ella.

Y no lo dijo a tonto ni a sordo, porque luego partió como un rayo y fue a
lo que se le mandaba. Todos los presentes estaban suspensos, esperando el
fin de aquel pleito, y de allí a poco volvieron el hombre y la mujer más
asidos y aferrados que la vez primera: ella la saya levantada y en el
regazo puesta la bolsa, y el hombre pugnando por quitársela; mas no era
posible, según la mujer la defendía, la cual daba voces diciendo:

-¡Justicia de Dios y del mundo! Mire vuestra merced, señor gobernador, la
poca vergüenza y el poco temor deste desalmado, que, en mitad de poblado y
en mitad de la calle, me ha querido quitar la bolsa que vuestra merced
mandó darme.

-Y ¿háosla quitado? -preguntó el gobernador.

-¿Cómo quitar? -respondió la mujer-. Antes me dejara yo quitar la vida que
me quiten la bolsa. ¡Bonita es la niña! ¡Otros gatos me han de echar a las
barbas, que no este desventurado y asqueroso! ¡Tenazas y martillos, mazos y
escoplos no serán bastantes a sacármela de las uñas, ni aun garras de
leones: antes el ánima de en mitad en mitad de las carnes!

-Ella tiene razón -dijo el hombre-, y yo me doy por rendido y sin fuerzas,
y confieso que las mías no son bastantes para quitársela, y déjola.

Entonces el gobernador dijo a la mujer:

-Mostrad, honrada y valiente, esa bolsa.

Ella se la dio luego, y el gobernador se la volvió al hombre, y dijo a la
esforzada y no forzada:

-Hermana mía, si el mismo aliento y valor que habéis mostrado para defender
esta bolsa le mostrárades, y aun la mitad menos, para defender vuestro
cuerpo, las fuerzas de Hércules no os hicieran fuerza. Andad con Dios, y
mucho de enhoramala, y no paréis en toda esta ínsula ni en seis leguas a la
redonda, so pena de docientos azotes. ¡Andad luego digo, churrillera,
desvergonzada y embaidora!

Espantóse la mujer y fuese cabizbaja y mal contenta, y el gobernador dijo
al hombre:

-Buen hombre, andad con Dios a vuestro lugar con vuestro dinero, y de aquí
adelante, si no le queréis perder, procurad que no os venga en voluntad de
yogar con nadie.

El hombre le dio las gracias lo peor que supo, y fuese, y los circunstantes
quedaron admirados de nuevo de los juicios y sentencias de su nuevo
gobernador. Todo lo cual, notado de su coronista, fue luego escrito al
duque, que con gran deseo lo estaba esperando.

Y quédese aquí el buen Sancho, que es mucha la priesa que nos da su amo,
alborozado con la música de Altisidora.





Capítulo XLVI. Del temeroso espanto cencerril y gatuno que recibió don
Quijote en el discurso de los amores de la enamorada Altisidora


Dejamos al gran don Quijote envuelto en los pensamientos que le habían
causado la música de la enamorada doncella Altisidora. Acostóse con ellos,
y, como si fueran pulgas, no le dejaron dormir ni sosegar un punto, y
juntábansele los que le faltaban de sus medias; pero, como es ligero el
tiempo, y no hay barranco que le detenga, corrió caballero en las horas, y
con mucha presteza llegó la de la mañana. Lo cual visto por don Quijote,
dejó las blandas plumas, y, no nada perezoso, se vistió su acamuzado
vestido y se calzó sus botas de camino, por encubrir la desgracia de sus
medias; arrojóse encima su mantón de escarlata y púsose en la cabeza una
montera de terciopelo verde, guarnecida de pasamanos de plata; colgó el
tahelí de sus hombros con su buena y tajadora espada, asió un gran rosario
que consigo contino traía, y con gran prosopopeya y contoneo salió a la
antesala, donde el duque y la duquesa estaban ya vestidos y como
esperándole; y, al pasar por una galería, estaban aposta esperándole
Altisidora y la otra doncella su amiga, y, así como Altisidora vio a don
Quijote, fingió desmayarse, y su amiga la recogió en sus faldas, y con gran
presteza la iba a desabrochar el pecho. Don Quijote, que lo vio, llegándose
a ellas, dijo:

-Ya sé yo de qué proceden estos accidentes.

-No sé yo de qué -respondió la amiga-, porque Altisidora es la doncella más
sana de toda esta casa, y yo nunca la he sentido un ¡ay! en cuanto ha que
la conozco, que mal hayan cuantos caballeros andantes hay en el mundo, si
es que todos son desagradecidos. Váyase vuesa merced, señor don Quijote,
que no volverá en sí esta pobre niña en tanto que vuesa merced aquí
estuviere.

A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Haga vuesa merced, señora, que se me ponga un laúd esta noche en mi
aposento, que yo consolaré lo mejor que pudiere a esta lastimada doncella;
que en los principios amorosos los desengaños prestos suelen ser remedios
calificados.

Y con esto se fue, porque no fuese notado de los que allí le viesen. No se
hubo bien apartado, cuando, volviendo en sí la desmayada Altisidora, dijo a
su compañera:

-Menester será que se le ponga el laúd, que sin duda don Quijote quiere
darnos música, y no será mala, siendo suya.

Fueron luego a dar cuenta a la duquesa de lo que pasaba y del laúd que
pedía don Quijote, y ella, alegre sobremodo, concertó con el duque y con
sus doncellas de hacerle una burla que fuese más risueña que dañosa, y con
mucho contento esperaban la noche, que se vino tan apriesa como se había
venido el día, el cual pasaron los duques en sabrosas pláticas con don
Quijote. Y la duquesa aquel día real y verdaderamente despachó a un paje
suyo, que había hecho en la selva la figura encantada de Dulcinea, a Teresa
Panza, con la carta de su marido Sancho Panza, y con el lío de ropa que
había dejado para que se le enviase, encargándole le trujese buena
relación de todo lo que con ella pasase.

Hecho esto, y llegadas las once horas de la noche, halló don Quijote una
vihuela en su aposento; templóla, abrió la reja, y sintió que andaba gente
en el jardín; y, habiendo recorrido los trastes de la vihuela y afinándola
lo mejor que supo, escupió y remondóse el pecho, y luego, con una voz
ronquilla, aunque entonada, cantó el siguiente romance, que él mismo aquel
día había compuesto:

   -Suelen las fuerzas de amor
   sacar de quicio a las almas,
   tomando por instrumento
   la ociosidad descuidada.
   Suele el coser y el labrar,
   y el estar siempre ocupada,
   ser antídoto al veneno
   de las amorosas ansias.
   Las doncellas recogidas
   que aspiran a ser casadas,
   la honestidad es la dote
   y voz de sus alabanzas.
   Los andantes caballeros,
   y los que en la corte andan,
   requiébranse con las libres,
   con las honestas se casan.
   Hay amores de levante,
   que entre huéspedes se tratan,
   que llegan presto al poniente,
   porque en el partirse acaban.
   El amor recién venido,
   que hoy llegó y se va mañana,
   las imágines no deja
   bien impresas en el alma.
   Pintura sobre pintura
   ni se muestra ni señala;
   y do hay primera belleza,
   la segunda no hace baza.
   Dulcinea del Toboso
   del alma en la tabla rasa
   tengo pintada de modo
   que es imposible borrarla.
   La firmeza en los amantes
   es la parte más preciada,
   por quien hace amor milagros,
   y asimesmo los levanta.

Aquí llegaba don Quijote de su canto, a quien estaban escuchando el duque y
la duquesa, Altisidora y casi toda la gente del castillo, cuando de
improviso, desde encima de un corredor que sobre la reja de don Quijote a
plomo caía, descolgaron un cordel donde venían más de cien cencerros
asidos, y luego, tras ellos, derramaron un gran saco de gatos, que asimismo
traían cencerros menores atados a las colas. Fue tan grande el ruido de los
cencerros y el mayar de los gatos, que, aunque los duques habían sido
inventores de la burla, todavía les sobresaltó; y, temeroso, don Quijote
quedó pasmado. Y quiso la suerte que dos o tres gatos se entraron por la
reja de su estancia, y, dando de una parte a otra, parecía que una región
de diablos andaba en ella. Apagaron las velas que en el aposento ardían, y
andaban buscando por do escaparse. El descolgar y subir del cordel de los
grandes cencerros no cesaba; la mayor parte de la gente del castillo, que
no sabía la verdad del caso, estaba suspensa y admirada.

Levantóse don Quijote en pie, y, poniendo mano a la espada, comenzó a tirar
estocadas por la reja y a decir a grandes voces:

-¡Afuera, malignos encantadores! ¡Afuera, canalla hechiceresca, que yo soy
don Quijote de la Mancha, contra quien no valen ni tienen fuerza vuestras
malas intenciones!

Y, volviéndose a los gatos que andaban por el aposento, les tiró muchas
cuchilladas; ellos acudieron a la reja, y por allí se salieron, aunque uno,
viéndose tan acosado de las cuchilladas de don Quijote, le saltó al rostro
y le asió de las narices con las uñas y los dientes, por cuyo dolor don
Quijote comenzó a dar los mayores gritos que pudo. Oyendo lo cual el duque
y la duquesa, y considerando lo que podía ser, con mucha presteza acudieron
a su estancia, y, abriendo con llave maestra, vieron al pobre caballero
pugnando con todas sus fuerzas por arrancar el gato de su rostro. Entraron
con luces y vieron la desigual pelea; acudió el duque a despartirla, y don
Quijote dijo a voces:

-¡No me le quite nadie! ¡Déjenme mano a mano con este demonio, con este
hechicero, con este encantador, que yo le daré a entender de mí a él quién
es don Quijote de la Mancha!

Pero el gato, no curándose destas amenazas, gruñía y apretaba. Mas, en fin,
el duque se le desarraigó y le echó por la reja.

Quedó don Quijote acribado el rostro y no muy sanas las narices, aunque muy
despechado porque no le habían dejado fenecer la batalla que tan trabada
tenía con aquel malandrín encantador. Hicieron traer aceite de Aparicio, y
la misma Altisidora, con sus blanquísimas manos, le puso unas vendas por
todo lo herido; y, al ponérselas, con voz baja le dijo:

-Todas estas malandanzas te suceden, empedernido caballero, por el pecado
de tu dureza y pertinacia; y plega a Dios que se le olvide a Sancho tu
escudero el azotarse, porque nunca salga de su encanto esta tan amada tuya
Dulcinea, ni tú lo goces, ni llegues a tálamo con ella, a lo menos viviendo
yo, que te adoro.

A todo esto no respondió don Quijote otra palabra si no fue dar un profundo
suspiro, y luego se tendió en su lecho, agradeciendo a los duques la
merced, no porque él tenía temor de aquella canalla gatesca, encantadora y
cencerruna, sino porque había conocido la buena intención con que habían
venido a socorrerle. Los duques le dejaron sosegar, y se fueron, pesarosos
del mal suceso de la burla; que no creyeron que tan pesada y costosa le
saliera a don Quijote aquella aventura, que le costó cinco días de
encerramiento y de cama, donde le sucedió otra aventura más gustosa que la
pasada, la cual no quiere su historiador contar ahora, por acudir a Sancho
Panza, que andaba muy solícito y muy gracioso en su gobierno.





Capítulo XLVII. Donde se prosigue cómo se portaba Sancho Panza en su
gobierno


Cuenta la historia que desde el juzgado llevaron a Sancho Panza a un
suntuoso palacio, adonde en una gran sala estaba puesta una real y
limpísima mesa; y, así como Sancho entró en la sala, sonaron chirimías, y
salieron cuatro pajes a darle aguamanos, que Sancho recibió con mucha
gravedad.

Cesó la música, sentóse Sancho a la cabecera de la mesa, porque no había
más de aquel asiento, y no otro servicio en toda ella. Púsose a su lado en
pie un personaje, que después mostró ser médico, con una varilla de ballena
en la mano. Levantaron una riquísima y blanca toalla con que estaban
cubiertas las frutas y mucha diversidad de platos de diversos manjares; uno
que parecía estudiante echó la bendición, y un paje puso un babador randado
a Sancho; otro que hacía el oficio de maestresala, llegó un plato de fruta
delante; pero, apenas hubo comido un bocado, cuando el de la varilla
tocando con ella en el plato, se le quitaron de delante con grandísima
celeridad; pero el maestresala le llegó otro de otro manjar. Iba a probarle
Sancho; pero, antes que llegase a él ni le gustase, ya la varilla había
tocado en él, y un paje alzádole con tanta presteza como el de la fruta.
Visto lo cual por Sancho, quedó suspenso, y, mirando a todos, preguntó si
se había de comer aquella comida como juego de maesecoral. A lo cual
respondió el de la vara:

-No se ha de comer, señor gobernador, sino como es uso y costumbre en las
otras ínsulas donde hay gobernadores. Yo, señor, soy médico, y estoy
asalariado en esta ínsula para serlo de los gobernadores della, y miro por
su salud mucho más que por la mía, estudiando de noche y de día, y
tanteando la complexión del gobernador, para acertar a curarle cuando
cayere enfermo; y lo principal que hago es asistir a sus comidas y cenas, y
a dejarle comer de lo que me parece que le conviene, y a quitarle lo que
imagino que le ha de hacer daño y ser nocivo al estómago; y así, mandé
quitar el plato de la fruta, por ser demasiadamente húmeda, y el plato del
otro manjar también le mandé quitar, por ser demasiadamente caliente y
tener muchas especies, que acrecientan la sed; y el que mucho bebe mata y
consume el húmedo radical, donde consiste la vida.

-Desa manera, aquel plato de perdices que están allí asadas, y, a mi
parecer, bien sazonadas, no me harán algún daño.

A lo que el médico respondió:

-Ésas no comerá el señor gobernador en tanto que yo tuviere vida.

-Pues, ¿por qué? -dijo Sancho.

Y el médico respondió:

-Porque nuestro maestro Hipócrates, norte y luz de la medicina, en un
aforismo suyo, dice: Omnis saturatio mala, perdices autem pessima. Quiere
decir: "Toda hartazga es mala; pero la de las perdices, malísima".

-Si eso es así -dijo Sancho-, vea el señor doctor de cuantos manjares hay
en esta mesa cuál me hará más provecho y cuál menos daño, y déjeme comer
dél sin que me le apalee; porque, por vida del gobernador, y así Dios me le
deje gozar, que me muero de hambre, y el negarme la comida, aunque le pese
al señor doctor y él más me diga, antes será quitarme la vida que
aumentármela.

-Vuestra merced tiene razón, señor gobernador -respondió el médico-; y así,
es mi parecer que vuestra merced no coma de aquellos conejos guisados que
allí están, porque es manjar peliagudo. De aquella ternera, si no fuera
asada y en adobo, aún se pudiera probar, pero no hay para qué.

Y Sancho dijo:

-Aquel platonazo que está más adelante vahando me parece que es olla
podrida, que por la diversidad de cosas que en las tales ollas podridas
hay, no podré dejar de topar con alguna que me sea de gusto y de provecho.

-Absit! -dijo el médico-. Vaya lejos de nosotros tan mal pensamiento: no
hay cosa en el mundo de peor mantenimiento que una olla podrida. Allá las
ollas podridas para los canónigos, o para los retores de colegios, o para
las bodas labradorescas, y déjennos libres las mesas de los gobernadores,
donde ha de asistir todo primor y toda atildadura; y la razón es porque
siempre y a doquiera y de quienquiera son más estimadas las medicinas
simples que las compuestas, porque en las simples no se puede errar y en
las compuestas sí, alterando la cantidad de las cosas de que son
compuestas; mas lo que yo sé que ha de comer el señor gobernador ahora,
para conservar su salud y corroborarla, es un ciento de cañutillos de
suplicaciones y unas tajadicas subtiles de carne de membrillo, que le
asienten el estómago y le ayuden a la digestión.

Oyendo esto Sancho, se arrimó sobre el espaldar de la silla y miró de hito
en hito al tal médico, y con voz grave le preguntó cómo se llamaba y dónde
había estudiado. A lo que él respondió:

-Yo, señor gobernador, me llamo el doctor Pedro Recio de Agüero, y soy
natural de un lugar llamado Tirteafuera, que está entre Caracuel y
Almodóvar del Campo, a la mano derecha, y tengo el grado de doctor por la
universidad de Osuna.

A lo que respondió Sancho, todo encendido en cólera:

-Pues, señor doctor Pedro Recio de Mal Agüero, natural de Tirteafuera,
lugar que está a la derecha mano como vamos de Caracuel a Almodóvar del
Campo, graduado en Osuna, quíteseme luego delante, si no, voto al sol que
tome un garrote y que a garrotazos, comenzando por él, no me ha de quedar
médico en toda la ínsula, a lo menos de aquellos que yo entienda que son
ignorantes; que a los médicos sabios, prudentes y discretos los pondré
sobre mi cabeza y los honraré como a personas divinas. Y vuelvo a decir que
se me vaya, Pedro Recio, de aquí; si no, tomaré esta silla donde estoy
sentado y se la estrellaré en la cabeza; y pídanmelo en residencia, que yo
me descargaré con decir que hice servicio a Dios en matar a un mal médico,
verdugo de la república. Y denme de comer, o si no, tómense su gobierno,
que oficio que no da de comer a su dueño no vale dos habas.

Alborotóse el doctor, viendo tan colérico al gobernador, y quiso hacer
tirteafuera de la sala, sino que en aquel instante sonó una corneta de
posta en la calle, y, asomándose el maestresala a la ventana, volvió
diciendo:

-Correo viene del duque mi señor; algún despacho debe de traer de
importancia.

Entró el correo sudando y asustado, y, sacando un pliego del seno, le puso
en las manos del gobernador, y Sancho le puso en las del mayordomo, a quien
mandó leyese el sobreescrito, que decía así: A don Sancho Panza, gobernador
de la ínsula Barataria, en su propia mano o en las de su secretario. Oyendo
lo cual, Sancho dijo:

-¿Quién es aquí mi secretario?

Y uno de los que presentes estaban respondió:

-Yo, señor, porque sé leer y escribir, y soy vizcaíno.

-Con esa añadidura -dijo Sancho-, bien podéis ser secretario del mismo
emperador. Abrid ese pliego, y mirad lo que dice.

Hízolo así el recién nacido secretario, y, habiendo leído lo que decía,
dijo que era negocio para tratarle a solas. Mandó Sancho despejar la sala,
y que no quedasen en ella sino el mayordomo y el maestresala, y los demás y
el médico se fueron; y luego el secretario leyó la carta, que así decía:

A mi noticia ha llegado, señor don Sancho Panza, que unos enemigos míos y
desa ínsula la han de dar un asalto furioso, no sé qué noche; conviene
velar y estar alerta, porque no le tomen desapercebido. Sé también, por
espías verdaderas, que han entrado en ese lugar cuatro personas disfrazadas
para quitaros la vida, porque se temen de vuestro ingenio; abrid el ojo, y
mirad quién llega a hablaros, y no comáis de cosa que os presentaren. Yo
tendré cuidado de socorreros si os viéredes en trabajo, y en todo haréis
como se espera de vuestro entendimiento. Deste lugar, a 16 de agosto, a las
cuatro de la mañana.

Vuestro amigo,

El Duque.

Quedó atónito Sancho, y mostraron quedarlo asimismo los circunstantes; y,
volviéndose al mayordomo, le dijo:

-Lo que agora se ha de hacer, y ha de ser luego, es meter en un calabozo al
doctor Recio; porque si alguno me ha de matar, ha de ser él, y de muerte
adminícula y pésima, como es la de la hambre.

-También -dijo el maestresala- me parece a mí que vuesa merced no coma de
todo lo que está en esta mesa, porque lo han presentado unas monjas, y,
como suele decirse, detrás de la cruz está el diablo.

-No lo niego -respondió Sancho-, y por ahora denme un pedazo de pan y obra
de cuatro libras de uvas, que en ellas no podrá venir veneno; porque, en
efecto, no puedo pasar sin comer, y si es que hemos de estar prontos para
estas batallas que nos amenazan, menester será estar bien mantenidos,
porque tripas llevan corazón, que no corazón tripas. Y vos, secretario,
responded al duque mi señor y decidle que se cumplirá lo que manda como lo
manda, sin faltar punto; y daréis de mi parte un besamanos a mi señora la
duquesa, y que le suplico no se le olvide de enviar con un propio mi carta
y mi lío a mi mujer Teresa Panza, que en ello recibiré mucha merced, y
tendré cuidado de servirla con todo lo que mis fuerzas alcanzaren; y de
camino podéis encajar un besamanos a mi señor don Quijote de la Mancha,
porque vea que soy pan agradecido; y vos, como buen secretario y como buen
vizcaíno, podéis añadir todo lo que quisiéredes y más viniere a cuento. Y
álcense estos manteles, y denme a mí de comer, que yo me avendré con
cuantas espías y matadores y encantadores vinieren sobre mí y sobre mi
ínsula.

En esto entró un paje, y dijo:

-Aquí está un labrador negociante que quiere hablar a Vuestra Señoría en un
negocio, según él dice, de mucha importancia.

-Estraño caso es éste -dijo Sancho- destos negociantes. ¿Es posible que
sean tan necios, que no echen de ver que semejantes horas como éstas no son
en las que han de venir a negociar? ¿Por ventura los que gobernamos, los
que somos jueces, no somos hombres de carne y de hueso, y que es menester
que nos dejen descansar el tiempo que la necesidad pide, sino que quieren
que seamos hechos de piedra marmol? Por Dios y en mi conciencia que si me
dura el gobierno (que no durará, según se me trasluce), que yo ponga en
pretina a más de un negociante. Agora decid a ese buen hombre que entre;
pero adviértase primero no sea alguno de los espías, o matador mío.

-No, señor -respondió el paje-, porque parece una alma de cántaro, y yo sé
poco, o él es tan bueno como el buen pan.

-No hay que temer -dijo el mayordomo-, que aquí estamos todos.

-¿Sería posible -dijo Sancho-, maestresala, que agora que no está aquí el
doctor Pedro Recio, que comiese yo alguna cosa de peso y de sustancia,
aunque fuese un pedazo de pan y una cebolla?

-Esta noche, a la cena, se satisfará la falta de la comida, y quedará
Vuestra Señoría satisfecho y pagado -dijo el maestresala.

-Dios lo haga -respondió Sancho.

Y, en esto, entró el labrador, que era de muy buena presencia, y de mil
leguas se le echaba de ver que era bueno y buena alma. Lo primero que dijo
fue:

-¿Quién es aquí el señor gobernador?

-¿Quién ha de ser -respondió el secretario-, sino el que está sentado en la
silla?

-Humíllome, pues, a su presencia -dijo el labrador.

Y, poniéndose de rodillas, le pidió la mano para besársela. Negósela
Sancho, y mandó que se levantase y dijese lo que quisiese. Hízolo así el
labrador, y luego dijo:

-Yo, señor, soy labrador, natural de Miguel Turra, un lugar que está dos
leguas de Ciudad Real.

-¡Otro Tirteafuera tenemos! -dijo Sancho-. Decid, hermano, que lo que yo os
sé decir es que sé muy bien a Miguel Turra, y que no está muy lejos de mi
pueblo.

-Es, pues, el caso, señor -prosiguió el labrador-, que yo, por la
misericordia de Dios, soy casado en paz y en haz de la Santa Iglesia
Católica Romana; tengo dos hijos estudiantes que el menor estudia para
bachiller y el mayor para licenciado; soy viudo, porque se murió mi mujer,
o, por mejor decir, me la mató un mal médico, que la purgó estando preñada,
y si Dios fuera servido que saliera a luz el parto, y fuera hijo, yo le
pusiere a estudiar para doctor, porque no tuviera invidia a sus hermanos el
bachiller y el licenciado.

-De modo -dijo Sancho- que si vuestra mujer no se hubiera muerto, o la
hubieran muerto, vos no fuérades agora viudo.

-No, señor, en ninguna manera -respondió el labrador.

-¡Medrados estamos! -replicó Sancho-. Adelante, hermano, que es hora de
dormir más que de negociar.

-Digo, pues -dijo el labrador-, que este mi hijo que ha de ser bachiller se
enamoró en el mesmo pueblo de una doncella llamada Clara Perlerina, hija de
Andrés Perlerino, labrador riquísimo; y este nombre de Perlerines no les
viene de abolengo ni otra alcurnia, sino porque todos los deste linaje son
perláticos, y por mejorar el nombre los llaman Perlerines; aunque, si va
decir la verdad, la doncella es como una perla oriental, y, mirada por el
lado derecho, parece una flor del campo; por el izquierdo no tanto, porque
le falta aquel ojo, que se le saltó de viruelas; y, aunque los hoyos del
rostro son muchos y grandes, dicen los que la quieren bien que aquéllos no
son hoyos, sino sepulturas donde se sepultan las almas de sus amantes. Es
tan limpia que, por no ensuciar la cara, trae las narices, como dicen,
arremangadas, que no parece sino que van huyendo de la boca; y, con todo
esto, parece bien por estremo, porque tiene la boca grande, y, a no
faltarle diez o doce dientes y muelas, pudiera pasar y echar raya entre las
más bien formadas. De los labios no tengo qué decir, porque son tan sutiles
y delicados que, si se usaran aspar labios, pudieran hacer dellos una
madeja; pero, como tienen diferente color de la que en los labios se usa
comúnmente, parecen milagrosos, porque son jaspeados de azul y verde y
aberenjenado; y perdóneme el señor gobernador si por tan menudo voy
pintando las partes de la que al fin al fin ha de ser mi hija, que la
quiero bien y no me parece mal.

-Pintad lo que quisiéredes -dijo Sancho-, que yo me voy recreando en la
pintura, y si hubiera comido, no hubiera mejor postre para mí que vuestro
retrato.

-Eso tengo yo por servir -respondió el labrador-, pero tiempo vendrá en que
seamos, si ahora no somos. Y digo, señor, que si pudiera pintar su
gentileza y la altura de su cuerpo, fuera cosa de admiración; pero no puede
ser, a causa de que ella está agobiada y encogida, y tiene las rodillas con
la boca, y, con todo eso, se echa bien de ver que si se pudiera levantar,
diera con la cabeza en el techo; y ya ella hubiera dado la mano de esposa a
mi bachiller, sino que no la puede estender, que está añudada; y, con todo,
en las uñas largas y acanaladas se muestra su bondad y buena hechura.

-Está bien -dijo Sancho-, y haced cuenta, hermano, que ya la habéis pintado
de los pies a la cabeza. ¿Qué es lo que queréis ahora? Y venid al punto sin
rodeos ni callejuelas, ni retazos ni añadiduras.

-Querría, señor -respondió el labrador-, que vuestra merced me hiciese
merced de darme una carta de favor para mi consuegro, suplicándole sea
servido de que este casamiento se haga, pues no somos desiguales en los
bienes de fortuna, ni en los de la naturaleza; porque, para decir la
verdad, señor gobernador, mi hijo es endemoniado, y no hay día que tres o
cuatro veces no le atormenten los malignos espíritus; y de haber caído una
vez en el fuego, tiene el rostro arrugado como pergamino, y los ojos algo
llorosos y manantiales; pero tiene una condición de un ángel, y si no es
que se aporrea y se da de puñadas él mesmo a sí mesmo, fuera un bendito.

-¿Queréis otra cosa, buen hombre? -replicó Sancho.

-Otra cosa querría -dijo el labrador-, sino que no me atrevo a decirlo;
pero vaya, que, en fin, no se me ha de podrir en el pecho, pegue o no
pegue. Digo, señor, que querría que vuesa merced me diese trecientos o
seiscientos ducados para ayuda a la dote de mi bachiller; digo para ayuda
de poner su casa, porque, en fin, han de vivir por sí, sin estar sujetos a
las impertinencias de los suegros.

-Mirad si queréis otra cosa -dijo Sancho-, y no la dejéis de decir por
empacho ni por vergüenza.

-No, por cierto -respondió el labrador.

Y, apenas dijo esto, cuando, levantándose en pie el gobernador, asió de la
silla en que estaba sentado y dijo:

-¡Voto a tal, don patán rústico y mal mirado, que si no os apartáis y
ascondéis luego de mi presencia, que con esta silla os rompa y abra la
cabeza! Hideputa bellaco, pintor del mesmo demonio, ¿y a estas horas te
vienes a pedirme seiscientos ducados?; y ¿dónde los tengo yo, hediondo?; y
¿por qué te los había de dar, aunque los tuviera, socarrón y mentecato?; y
¿qué se me da a mí de Miguel Turra, ni de todo el linaje de los Perlerines?
¡Va de mí, digo; si no, por vida del duque mi señor, que haga lo que tengo
dicho! Tú no debes de ser de Miguel Turra, sino algún socarrón que, para
tentarme, te ha enviado aquí el infierno. Dime, desalmado, aún no ha día y
medio que tengo el gobierno, y ¿ya quieres que tenga seiscientos ducados?

Hizo de señas el maestresala al labrador que se saliese de la sala, el cual
lo hizo cabizbajo y, al parecer, temeroso de que el gobernador no ejecutase
su cólera, que el bellacón supo hacer muy bien su oficio.

Pero dejemos con su cólera a Sancho, y ándese la paz en el corro, y
volvamos a don Quijote, que le dejamos vendado el rostro y curado de las
gatescas heridas, de las cuales no sanó en ocho días, en uno de los cuales
le sucedió lo que Cide Hamete promete de contar con la puntualidad y
verdad que suele contar las cosas desta historia, por mínimas que sean.





Capítulo XLVIII. De lo que le sucedió a don Quijote con doña Rodríguez, la
dueña de la duquesa, con otros acontecimientos dignos de escritura y de
memoria eterna


Además estaba mohíno y malencólico el mal ferido don Quijote, vendado el
rostro y señalado, no por la mano de Dios, sino por las uñas de un gato,
desdichas anejas a la andante caballería. Seis días estuvo sin salir en
público, en una noche de las cuales, estando despierto y desvelado,
pensando en sus desgracias y en el perseguimiento de Altisidora, sintió que
con una llave abrían la puerta de su aposento, y luego imaginó que la
enamorada doncella venía para sobresaltar su honestidad y ponerle en
condición de faltar a la fee que guardar debía a su señora Dulcinea del
Toboso.

-No -dijo creyendo a su imaginación, y esto, con voz que pudiera ser oída-;
no ha de ser parte la mayor hermosura de la tierra para que yo deje de
adorar la que tengo grabada y estampada en la mitad de mi corazón y en lo
más escondido de mis entrañas, ora estés, señora mía, transformada en
cebolluda labradora, ora en ninfa del dorado Tajo, tejiendo telas de oro y
sirgo compuestas, ora te tenga Merlín, o Montesinos, donde ellos quisieren;
que, adondequiera eres mía, y adoquiera he sido yo, y he de ser, tuyo.

El acabar estas razones y el abrir de la puerta fue todo uno. Púsose en pie
sobre la cama, envuelto de arriba abajo en una colcha de raso amarillo, una
galocha en la cabeza, y el rostro y los bigotes vendados: el rostro, por
los aruños; los bigotes, porque no se le desmayasen y cayesen; en el cual
traje parecía la más extraordinaria fantasma que se pudiera pensar.

Clavó los ojos en la puerta, y, cuando esperaba ver entrar por ella a la
rendida y lastimada Altisidora, vio entrar a una reverendísima dueña con
unas tocas blancas repulgadas y luengas, tanto, que la cubrían y enmantaban
desde los pies a la cabeza. Entre los dedos de la mano izquierda traía una
media vela encendida, y con la derecha se hacía sombra, porque no le diese
la luz en los ojos, a quien cubrían unos muy grandes antojos. Venía pisando
quedito, y movía los pies blandamente.

Miróla don Quijote desde su atalaya, y cuando vio su adeliño y notó su
silencio, pensó que alguna bruja o maga venía en aquel traje a hacer en él
alguna mala fechuría, y comenzó a santiguarse con mucha priesa. Fuese
llegando la visión, y, cuando llegó a la mitad del aposento, alzó los ojos
y vio la priesa con que se estaba haciendo cruces don Quijote; y si él
quedó medroso en ver tal figura, ella quedó espantada en ver la suya,
porque, así como le vio tan alto y tan amarillo, con la colcha y con las
vendas, que le desfiguraban, dio una gran voz, diciendo:

-¡Jesús! ¿Qué es lo que veo?

Y con el sobresalto se le cayó la vela de las manos; y, viéndose a escuras,
volvió las espaldas para irse, y con el miedo tropezó en sus faldas y dio
consigo una gran caída. Don Quijote, temeroso, comenzó a decir:

-Conjúrote, fantasma, o lo que eres, que me digas quién eres, y que me
digas qué es lo que de mí quieres. Si eres alma en pena, dímelo, que yo
haré por ti todo cuanto mis fuerzas alcanzaren, porque soy católico
cristiano y amigo de hacer bien a todo el mundo; que para esto tomé la
orden de la caballería andante que profeso, cuyo ejercicio aun hasta hacer
bien a las ánimas de purgatorio se estiende.

La brumada dueña, que oyó conjurarse, por su temor coligió el de don
Quijote, y con voz afligida y baja le respondió:

-Señor don Quijote, si es que acaso vuestra merced es don Quijote, yo no
soy fantasma, ni visión, ni alma de purgatorio, como vuestra merced debe de
haber pensado, sino doña Rodríguez, la dueña de honor de mi señora la
duquesa, que, con una necesidad de aquellas que vuestra merced suele
remediar, a vuestra merced vengo.

-Dígame, señora doña Rodríguez -dijo don Quijote-: ¿por ventura viene
vuestra merced a hacer alguna tercería? Porque le hago saber que no soy de
provecho para nadie, merced a la sin par belleza de mi señora Dulcinea del
Toboso. Digo, en fin, señora doña Rodríguez, que, como vuestra merced salve
y deje a una parte todo recado amoroso, puede volver a encender su vela, y
vuelva, y departiremos de todo lo que más mandare y más en gusto le
viniere, salvando, como digo, todo incitativo melindre.

-¿Yo recado de nadie, señor mío? -respondió la dueña-. Mal me conoce
vuestra merced; sí, que aún no estoy en edad tan prolongada que me acoja a
semejantes niñerías, pues, Dios loado, mi alma me tengo en las carnes, y
todos mis dientes y muelas en la boca, amén de unos pocos que me han
usurpado unos catarros, que en esta tierra de Aragón son tan ordinarios.
Pero espéreme vuestra merced un poco; saldré a encender mi vela, y volveré
en un instante a contar mis cuitas, como a remediador de todas las del
mundo.

Y, sin esperar respuesta, se salió del aposento, donde quedó don Quijote
sosegado y pensativo esperándola; pero luego le sobrevinieron mil
pensamientos acerca de aquella nueva aventura, y parecíale ser mal hecho y
peor pensado ponerse en peligro de romper a su señora la fee prometida, y
decíase a sí mismo:

-¿Quién sabe si el diablo, que es sutil y mañoso, querrá engañarme agora
con una dueña, lo que no ha podido con emperatrices, reinas, duquesas,
marquesas ni condesas? Que yo he oído decir muchas veces y a muchos
discretos que, si él puede, antes os la dará roma que aguileña. Y ¿quién
sabe si esta soledad, esta ocasión y este silencio despertará mis deseos
que duermen, y harán que al cabo de mis años venga a caer donde nunca he
tropezado? Y, en casos semejantes, mejor es huir que esperar la batalla.
Pero yo no debo de estar en mi juicio, pues tales disparates digo y pienso;
que no es posible que una dueña toquiblanca, larga y antojuna pueda mover
ni levantar pensamiento lascivo en el más desalmado pecho del mundo. ¿Por
ventura hay dueña en la tierra que tenga buenas carnes? ¿Por ventura hay
dueña en el orbe que deje de ser impertinente, fruncida y melindrosa?
¡Afuera, pues, caterva dueñesca, inútil para ningún humano regalo! ¡Oh,
cuán bien hacía aquella señora de quien se dice que tenía dos dueñas de
bulto con sus antojos y almohadillas al cabo de su estrado, como que
estaban labrando, y tanto le servían para la autoridad de la sala aquellas
estatuas como las dueñas verdaderas!

Y, diciendo esto, se arrojó del lecho, con intención de cerrar la puerta y
no dejar entrar a la señora Rodríguez; mas, cuando la llegó a cerrar, ya la
señora Rodríguez volvía, encendida una vela de cera blanca, y cuando ella
vio a don Quijote de más cerca, envuelto en la colcha, con las vendas,
galocha o becoquín, temió de nuevo, y, retirándose atrás como dos pasos,
dijo:

-¿Estamos seguras, señor caballero? Porque no tengo a muy honesta señal
haberse vuesa merced levantado de su lecho.

-Eso mesmo es bien que yo pregunte, señora -respondió don Quijote-; y así,
pregunto si estaré yo seguro de ser acometido y forzado.

-¿De quién o a quién pedís, señor caballero, esa seguridad? -respondió la
dueña.

-A vos y de vos la pido -replicó don Quijote-, porque ni yo soy de mármol
ni vos de bronce, ni ahora son las diez del día, sino media noche, y aun un
poco más, según imagino, y en una estancia más cerrada y secreta que lo
debió de ser la cueva donde el traidor y atrevido Eneas gozó a la hermosa y
piadosa Dido. Pero dadme, señora, la mano, que yo no quiero otra seguridad
mayor que la de mi continencia y recato, y la que ofrecen esas
reverendísimas tocas.

Y, diciendo esto, besó su derecha mano, y le asió de la suya, que ella le
dio con las mesmas ceremonias.

Aquí hace Cide Hamete un paréntesis, y dice que por Mahoma que diera, por
ver ir a los dos así asidos y trabados desde la puerta al lecho, la mejor
almalafa de dos que tenía.

Entróse, en fin, don Quijote en su lecho, y quedóse doña Rodríguez sentada
en una silla, algo desviada de la cama, no quitándose los antojos ni la
vela. Don Quijote se acorrucó y se cubrió todo, no dejando más de el rostro
descubierto; y, habiéndose los dos sosegado, el primero que rompió el
silencio fue don Quijote, diciendo:

-Puede vuesa merced ahora, mi señora doña Rodríguez, descoserse y desbuchar
todo aquello que tiene dentro de su cuitado corazón y lastimadas entrañas,
que será de mí escuchada con castos oídos, y socorrida con piadosas obras.

-Así lo creo yo -respondió la dueña-, que de la gentil y agradable
presencia de vuesa merced no se podía esperar sino tan cristiana respuesta.
«Es, pues, el caso, señor don Quijote, que, aunque vuesa merced me vee
sentada en esta silla y en la mitad del reino de Aragón, y en hábito de
dueña aniquilada y asendereada, soy natural de las Asturias de Oviedo, y de
linaje que atraviesan por él muchos de los mejores de aquella provincia;
pero mi corta suerte y el descuido de mis padres, que empobrecieron antes
de tiempo, sin saber cómo ni cómo no, me trujeron a la corte, a Madrid,
donde por bien de paz y por escusar mayores desventuras, mis padres me
acomodaron a servir de doncella de labor a una principal señora; y quiero
hacer sabidor a vuesa merced que en hacer vainillas y labor blanca ninguna
me ha echado el pie adelante en toda la vida. Mis padres me dejaron
sirviendo y se volvieron a su tierra, y de allí a pocos años se debieron de
ir al cielo, porque eran además buenos y católicos cristianos. Quedé
huérfana, y atenida al miserable salario y a las angustiadas mercedes que
a las tales criadas se suele dar en palacio; y, en este tiempo, sin que
diese yo ocasión a ello, se enamoró de mi un escudero de casa, hombre ya en
días, barbudo y apersonado, y, sobre todo, hidalgo como el rey, porque era
montañés. No tratamos tan secretamente nuestros amores que no viniesen a
noticia de mi señora, la cual, por escusar dimes y diretes, nos casó en paz
y en haz de la Santa Madre Iglesia Católica Romana, de cuyo matrimonio
nació una hija para rematar con mi ventura, si alguna tenía; no porque yo
muriese del parto, que le tuve derecho y en sazón, sino porque desde allí a
poco murió mi esposo de un cierto espanto que tuvo, que, a tener ahora
lugar para contarle, yo sé que vuestra merced se admirara.»

Y, en esto, comenzó a llorar tiernamente, y dijo:

-Perdóneme vuestra merced, señor don Quijote, que no va más en mi mano,
porque todas las veces que me acuerdo de mi mal logrado se me arrasan los
ojos de lágrimas. ¡Válame Dios, y con qué autoridad llevaba a mi señora a
las ancas de una poderosa mula, negra como el mismo azabache! Que entonces
no se usaban coches ni sillas, como agora dicen que se usan, y las señoras
iban a las ancas de sus escuderos. Esto, a lo menos, no puedo dejar de
contarlo, porque se note la crianza y puntualidad de mi buen marido. «Al
entrar de la calle de Santiago, en Madrid, que es algo estrecha, venía a
salir por ella un alcalde de corte con dos alguaciles delante, y, así como
mi buen escudero le vio, volvió las riendas a la mula, dando señal de
volver a acompañarle. Mi señora, que iba a las ancas, con voz baja le
decía: ''-¿Qué hacéis, desventurado? ¿No veis que voy aquí?'' El alcalde,
de comedido, detuvo la rienda al caballo y díjole: ''-Seguid, señor,
vuestro camino, que yo soy el que debo acompañar a mi señora doña
Casilda'', que así era el nombre de mi ama. Todavía porfiaba mi marido, con
la gorra en la mano, a querer ir acompañando al alcalde, viendo lo cual mi
señora, llena de cólera y enojo, sacó un alfiler gordo, o creo que un
punzón, del estuche, y clavósele por los lomos, de manera que mi marido dio
una gran voz y torció el cuerpo, de suerte que dio con su señora en el
suelo. Acudieron dos lacayos suyos a levantarla, y lo mismo hizo el alcalde
y los alguaciles; alborotóse la Puerta de Guadalajara, digo, la gente
baldía que en ella estaba; vínose a pie mi ama, y mi marido acudió en casa
de un barbero diciendo que llevaba pasadas de parte a parte las entrañas.
Divulgóse la cortesía de mi esposo, tanto, que los muchachos le corrían por
las calles, y por esto y porque él era algún tanto corto de vista, mi
señora la duquesa le despidió, de cuyo pesar, sin duda alguna, tengo para
mí que se le causó el mal de la muerte. Quedé yo viuda y desamparada, y con
hija a cuestas, que iba creciendo en hermosura como la espuma de la mar.
Finalmente, como yo tuviese fama de gran labrandera, mi señora la duquesa,
que estaba recién casada con el duque mi señor, quiso traerme consigo a
este reino de Aragón y a mi hija ni más ni menos, adonde, yendo días y
viniendo días, creció mi hija, y con ella todo el donaire del mundo: canta
como una calandria, danza como el pensamiento, baila como una perdida, lee
y escribe como un maestro de escuela, y cuenta como un avariento. De su
limpieza no digo nada: que el agua que corre no es más limpia, y debe de
tener agora, si mal no me acuerdo, diez y seis años, cinco meses y tres
días, uno más a menos. En resolución: de esta mi muchacha se enamoró un
hijo de un labrador riquísimo que está en una aldea del duque mi señor, no
muy lejos de aquí. En efecto, no sé cómo ni cómo no, ellos se juntaron, y,
debajo de la palabra de ser su esposo, burló a mi hija, y no se la quiere
cumplir; y, aunque el duque mi señor lo sabe, porque yo me he quejado a él,
no una, sino muchas veces, y pedídole mande que el tal labrador se case con
mi hija, hace orejas de mercader y apenas quiere oírme; y es la causa que,
como el padre del burlador es tan rico y le presta dineros, y le sale por
fiador de sus trampas por momentos, no le quiere descontentar ni dar
pesadumbre en ningún modo.» Querría, pues, señor mío, que vuesa merced
tomase a cargo el deshacer este agravio, o ya por ruegos, o ya por armas,
pues, según todo el mundo dice, vuesa merced nació en él para deshacerlos y
para enderezar los tuertos y amparar los miserables; y póngasele a vuesa
merced por delante la orfandad de mi hija, su gentileza, su mocedad, con
todas las buenas partes que he dicho que tiene; que en Dios y en mi
conciencia que de cuantas doncellas tiene mi señora, que no hay ninguna que
llegue a la suela de su zapato, y que una que llaman Altisidora, que es la
que tienen por más desenvuelta y gallarda, puesta en comparación de mi
hija, no la llega con dos leguas. Porque quiero que sepa vuesa merced,
señor mío, que no es todo oro lo que reluce; porque esta Altisidorilla
tiene más de presunción que de hermosura, y más de desenvuelta que de
recogida, además que no está muy sana: que tiene un cierto allento cansado,
que no hay sufrir el estar junto a ella un momento. Y aun mi señora la
duquesa... Quiero callar, que se suele decir que las paredes tienen oídos.

-¿Qué tiene mi señora la duquesa, por vida mía, señora doña Rodríguez?
-preguntó don Quijote.

-Con ese conjuro -respondió la dueña-, no puedo dejar de responder a lo que
se me pregunta con toda verdad. ¿Vee vuesa merced, señor don Quijote, la
hermosura de mi señora la duquesa, aquella tez de rostro, que no parece
sino de una espada acicalada y tersa, aquellas dos mejillas de leche y de
carmín, que en la una tiene el sol y en la otra la luna, y aquella
gallardía con que va pisando y aun despreciando el suelo, que no parece
sino que va derramando salud donde pasa? Pues sepa vuesa merced que lo
puede agradecer, primero, a Dios, y luego, a dos fuentes que tiene en las
dos piernas, por donde se desagua todo el mal humor de quien dicen los
médicos que está llena.

-¡Santa María! -dijo don Quijote-. Y ¿es posible que mi señora la duquesa
tenga tales desaguaderos? No lo creyera si me lo dijeran frailes descalzos;
pero, pues la señora doña Rodríguez lo dice, debe de ser así. Pero tales
fuentes, y en tales lugares, no deben de manar humor, sino ámbar líquido.
Verdaderamente que ahora acabo de creer que esto de hacerse fuentes debe de
ser cosa importante para salud.

Apenas acabó don Quijote de decir esta razón, cuando con un gran golpe
abrieron las puertas del aposento, y del sobresalto del golpe se le cayó a
doña Rodríguez la vela de la mano, y quedó la estancia como boca de lobo,
como suele decirse. Luego sintió la pobre dueña que la asían de la garganta
con dos manos, tan fuertemente que no la dejaban gañir, y que otra persona,
con mucha presteza, sin hablar palabra, le alzaba las faldas, y con una, al
parecer, chinela, le comenzó a dar tantos azotes, que era una compasión; y,
aunque don Quijote se la tenía, no se meneaba del lecho, y no sabía qué
podía ser aquello, y estábase quedo y callando, y aun temiendo no viniese
por él la tanda y tunda azotesca. Y no fue vano su temor, porque, en
dejando molida a la dueña los callados verdugos (la cual no osaba
quejarse), acudieron a don Quijote, y, desenvolviéndole de la sábana y de
la colcha, le pellizcaron tan a menudo y tan reciamente, que no pudo dejar
de defenderse a puñadas, y todo esto en silencio admirable. Duró la batalla
casi media hora; saliéronse las fantasmas, recogió doña Rodríguez sus
faldas, y, gimiendo su desgracia, se salió por la puerta afuera, sin decir
palabra a don Quijote, el cual, doloroso y pellizcado, confuso y pensativo,
se quedó solo, donde le dejaremos deseoso de saber quién había sido el
perverso encantador que tal le había puesto. Pero ello se dirá a su tiempo,
que Sancho Panza nos llama, y el buen concierto de la historia lo pide.





Capítulo XLIX. De lo que le sucedió a Sancho Panza rondando su ínsula


Dejamos al gran gobernador enojado y mohíno con el labrador pintor y
socarrón, el cual, industriado del mayordomo, y el mayordomo del duque, se
burlaban de Sancho; pero él se las tenía tiesas a todos, maguera tonto,
bronco y rollizo, y dijo a los que con él estaban, y al doctor Pedro Recio,
que, como se acabó el secreto de la carta del duque, había vuelto a entrar
en la sala:

-Ahora verdaderamente que entiendo que los jueces y gobernadores deben de
ser, o han de ser, de bronce, para no sentir las importunidades de los
negociantes, que a todas horas y a todos tiempos quieren que los escuchen y
despachen, atendiendo sólo a su negocio, venga lo que viniere; y si el
pobre del juez no los escucha y despacha, o porque no puede o porque no es
aquél el tiempo diputado para darles audiencia, luego les maldicen y
murmuran, y les roen los huesos, y aun les deslindan los linajes.
Negociante necio, negociante mentecato, no te apresures; espera sazón y
coyuntura para negociar: no vengas a la hora del comer ni a la del dormir,
que los jueces son de carne y de hueso y han de dar a la naturaleza lo que
naturalmente les pide, si no es yo, que no le doy de comer a la mía, merced
al señor doctor Pedro Recio Tirteafuera, que está delante, que quiere que
muera de hambre, y afirma que esta muerte es vida, que así se la dé Dios a
él y a todos los de su ralea: digo, a la de los malos médicos, que la de
los buenos, palmas y lauros merecen.

Todos los que conocían a Sancho Panza se admiraban, oyéndole hablar tan
elegantemente, y no sabían a qué atribuirlo, sino a que los oficios y
cargos graves, o adoban o entorpecen los entendimientos. Finalmente, el
doctor Pedro Recio Agüero de Tirteafuera prometió de darle de cenar aquella
noche, aunque excediese de todos los aforismos de Hipócrates. Con esto
quedó contento el gobernador, y esperaba con grande ansia llegase la noche
y la hora de cenar; y, aunque el tiempo, al parecer suyo, se estaba quedo,
sin moverse de un lugar, todavía se llegó por él el tanto deseado, donde
le dieron de cenar un salpicón de vaca con cebolla, y unas manos cocidas de
ternera algo entrada en días. Entregóse en todo con más gusto que si le
hubieran dado francolines de Milán, faisanes de Roma, ternera de Sorrento,
perdices de Morón, o gansos de Lavajos; y, entre la cena, volviéndose al
doctor, le dijo:

-Mirad, señor doctor: de aquí adelante no os curéis de darme a comer cosas
regaladas ni manjares esquisitos, porque será sacar a mi estómago de sus
quicios, el cual está acostumbrado a cabra, a vaca, a tocino, a cecina, a
nabos y a cebollas; y, si acaso le dan otros manjares de palacio, los
recibe con melindre, y algunas veces con asco. Lo que el maestresala puede
hacer es traerme estas que llaman ollas podridas, que mientras más podridas
son, mejor huelen, y en ellas puede embaular y encerrar todo lo que él
quisiere, como sea de comer, que yo se lo agradeceré y se lo pagaré algún
día; y no se burle nadie conmigo, porque o somos o no somos: vivamos todos
y comamos en buena paz compaña, pues, cuando Dios amanece, para todos
amanece. Yo gobernaré esta ínsula sin perdonar derecho ni llevar cohecho, y
todo el mundo traiga el ojo alerta y mire por el virote, porque les hago
saber que el diablo está en Cantillana, y que, si me dan ocasión, han de
ver maravillas. No, sino haceos miel, y comeros han moscas.

-Por cierto, señor gobernador -dijo el maestresala-, que vuesa merced tiene
mucha razón en cuanto ha dicho, y que yo ofrezco en nombre de todos los
insulanos desta ínsula que han de servir a vuestra merced con toda
puntualidad, amor y benevolencia, porque el suave modo de gobernar que en
estos principios vuesa merced ha dado no les da lugar de hacer ni de pensar
cosa que en deservicio de vuesa merced redunde.

-Yo lo creo -respondió Sancho-, y serían ellos unos necios si otra cosa
hiciesen o pensasen. Y vuelvo a decir que se tenga cuenta con mi sustento y
con el de mi rucio, que es lo que en este negocio importa y hace más al
caso; y, en siendo hora, vamos a rondar, que es mi intención limpiar esta
ínsula de todo género de inmundicia y de gente vagamunda, holgazanes, y mal
entretenida; porque quiero que sepáis, amigos, que la gente baldía y
perezosa es en la república lo mesmo que los zánganos en las colmenas, que
se comen la miel que las trabajadoras abejas hacen. Pienso favorecer a los
labradores, guardar sus preeminencias a los hidalgos, premiar los virtuosos
y, sobre todo, tener respeto a la religión y a la honra de los religiosos.
¿Qué os parece desto, amigos? ¿Digo algo, o quiébrome la cabeza?

-Dice tanto vuesa merced, señor gobernador -dijo el mayordomo-, que estoy
admirado de ver que un hombre tan sin letras como vuesa merced, que, a lo
que creo, no tiene ninguna, diga tales y tantas cosas llenas de sentencias
y de avisos, tan fuera de todo aquello que del ingenio de vuesa merced
esperaban los que nos enviaron y los que aquí venimos. Cada día se veen
cosas nuevas en el mundo: las burlas se vuelven en veras y los burladores
se hallan burlados.

Llegó la noche, y cenó el gobernador, con licencia del señor doctor Recio.
Aderezáronse de ronda; salió con el mayordomo, secretario y maestresala, y
el coronista que tenía cuidado de poner en memoria sus hechos, y alguaciles
y escribanos, tantos que podían formar un mediano escuadrón. Iba Sancho en
medio, con su vara, que no había más que ver, y pocas calles andadas del
lugar, sintieron ruido de cuchilladas; acudieron allá, y hallaron que eran
dos solos hombres los que reñían, los cuales, viendo venir a la justicia,
se estuvieron quedos; y el uno dellos dijo:

-¡Aquí de Dios y del rey! ¿Cómo y que se ha de sufrir que roben en poblado
en este pueblo, y que salga a saltear en él en la mitad de las calles?

-Sosegaos, hombre de bien -dijo Sancho-, y contadme qué es la causa desta
pendencia, que yo soy el gobernador.

El otro contrario dijo:

-Señor gobernador, yo la diré con toda brevedad. Vuestra merced sabrá que
este gentilhombre acaba de ganar ahora en esta casa de juego que está aquí
frontero más de mil reales, y sabe Dios cómo; y, hallándome yo presente,
juzgué más de una suerte dudosa en su favor, contra todo aquello que me
dictaba la conciencia; alzóse con la ganancia, y, cuando esperaba que me
había de dar algún escudo, por lo menos, de barato, como es uso y costumbre
darle a los hombres principales como yo, que estamos asistentes para bien y
mal pasar, y para apoyar sinrazones y evitar pendencias, él embolsó su
dinero y se salió de la casa. Yo vine despechado tras él, y con buenas y
corteses palabras le he pedido que me diese siquiera ocho reales, pues sabe
que yo soy hombre honrado y que no tengo oficio ni beneficio, porque mis
padres no me le enseñaron ni me le dejaron, y el socarrón, que no es más
ladrón que Caco, ni más fullero que Andradilla, no quería darme más de
cuatro reales; ¡porque vea vuestra merced, señor gobernador, qué poca
vergüenza y qué poca conciencia! Pero a fee que, si vuesa merced no
llegara, que yo le hiciera vomitar la ganancia, y que había de saber con
cuántas entraba la romana.

-¿Qué decís vos a esto? -preguntó Sancho.

Y el otro respondió que era verdad cuanto su contrario decía, y no había
querido darle más de cuatro reales porque se los daba muchas veces; y los
que esperan barato han de ser comedidos y tomar con rostro alegre lo que
les dieren, sin ponerse en cuentas con los gananciosos, si ya no supiesen
de cierto que son fulleros y que lo que ganan es mal ganado; y que, para
señal que él era hombre de bien y no ladrón, como decía, ninguna había
mayor que el no haberle querido dar nada; que siempre los fulleros son
tributarios de los mirones que los conocen.

-Así es -dijo el mayordomo-. Vea vuestra merced, señor gobernador, qué es
lo que se ha de hacer destos hombres.

-Lo que se ha de hacer es esto -respondió Sancho-: vos, ganancioso, bueno,
o malo, o indiferente, dad luego a este vuestro acuchillador cien reales, y
más, habéis de desembolsar treinta para los pobres de la cárcel; y vos, que
no tenéis oficio ni beneficio y andáis de nones en esta ínsula, tomad luego
esos cien reales, y mañana en todo el día salid desta ínsula desterrado por
diez años, so pena, si lo quebrantáredes, los cumpláis en la otra vida,
colgándoos yo de una picota, o, a lo menos, el verdugo por mi mandado; y
ninguno me replique, que le asentaré la mano.

Desembolsó el uno, recibió el otro, éste se salió de la ínsula, y aquél se
fue a su casa, y el gobernador quedó diciendo:

-Ahora, yo podré poco, o quitaré estas casas de juego, que a mí se me
trasluce que son muy perjudiciales.

-Ésta, a lo menos -dijo un escribano-, no la podrá vuesa merced quitar,
porque la tiene un gran personaje, y más es sin comparación lo que él
pierde al año que lo que saca de los naipes. Contra otros garitos de menor
cantía podrá vuestra merced mostrar su poder, que son los que más daño
hacen y más insolencias encubren; que en las casas de los caballeros
principales y de los señores no se atreven los famosos fulleros a usar de
sus tretas; y, pues el vicio del juego se ha vuelto en ejercicio común,
mejor es que se juegue en casas principales que no en la de algún oficial,
donde cogen a un desdichado de media noche abajo y le desuellan vivo.

-Agora, escribano -dijo Sancho-, yo sé que hay mucho que decir en eso.

Y, en esto, llegó un corchete que traía asido a un mozo, y dijo:

-Señor gobernador, este mancebo venía hacia nosotros, y, así como columbró
la justicia, volvió las espaldas y comenzó a correr como un gamo, señal que
debe de ser algún delincuente. Yo partí tras él, y, si no fuera porque
tropezó y cayó, no le alcanzara jamás.

-¿Por qué huías, hombre? -preguntó Sancho.

A lo que el mozo respondió:

-Señor, por escusar de responder a las muchas preguntas que las justicias
hacen.

-¿Qué oficio tienes?

-Tejedor.

-¿Y qué tejes?

-Hierros de lanzas, con licencia buena de vuestra merced.

-¿Graciosico me sois? ¿De chocarrero os picáis? ¡Está bien! Y ¿adónde
íbades ahora?

-Señor, a tomar el aire.

-Y ¿adónde se toma el aire en esta ínsula?

-Adonde sopla.

-¡Bueno: respondéis muy a propósito! Discreto sois, mancebo; pero haced
cuenta que yo soy el aire, y que os soplo en popa, y os encamino a la
cárcel. ¡Asilde, hola, y llevadle, que yo haré que duerma allí sin aire
esta noche!

-¡Par Dios -dijo el mozo-, así me haga vuestra merced dormir en la cárcel
como hacerme rey!

-Pues, ¿por qué no te haré yo dormir en la cárcel? -respondió Sancho-. ¿No
tengo yo poder para prenderte y soltarte cada y cuando que quisiere?

-Por más poder que vuestra merced tenga -dijo el mozo-, no será bastante
para hacerme dormir en la cárcel.

-¿Cómo que no? -replicó Sancho-. Llevalde luego donde verá por sus ojos el
desengaño, aunque más el alcaide quiera usar con él de su interesal
liberalidad; que yo le pondré pena de dos mil ducados si te deja salir un
paso de la cárcel.

-Todo eso es cosa de risa -respondió el mozo-. El caso es que no me harán
dormir en la cárcel cuantos hoy viven.

-Dime, demonio -dijo Sancho-, ¿tienes algún ángel que te saque y que te
quite los grillos que te pienso mandar echar?

-Ahora, señor gobernador -respondió el mozo con muy buen donaire-, estemos
a razón y vengamos al punto. Prosuponga vuestra merced que me manda llevar
a la cárcel, y que en ella me echan grillos y cadenas, y que me meten en un
calabozo, y se le ponen al alcaide graves penas si me deja salir, y que él
lo cumple como se le manda; con todo esto, si yo no quiero dormir, y
estarme despierto toda la noche, sin pegar pestaña, ¿será vuestra merced
bastante con todo su poder para hacerme dormir, si yo no quiero?

-No, por cierto -dijo el secretario-, y el hombre ha salido con su
intención.

-De modo -dijo Sancho- que no dejaréis de dormir por otra cosa que por
vuestra voluntad, y no por contravenir a la mía.

-No, señor -dijo el mozo-, ni por pienso.

-Pues andad con Dios -dijo Sancho-; idos a dormir a vuestra casa, y Dios os
dé buen sueño, que yo no quiero quitárosle; pero aconséjoos que de aquí
adelante no os burléis con la justicia, porque toparéis con alguna que os
dé con la burla en los cascos.

Fuese el mozo, y el gobernador prosiguió con su ronda, y de allí a poco
vinieron dos corchetes que traían a un hombre asido, y dijeron:

-Señor gobernador, este que parece hombre no lo es, sino mujer, y no fea,
que viene vestida en hábito de hombre.

Llegáronle a los ojos dos o tres lanternas, a cuyas luces descubrieron un
rostro de una mujer, al parecer, de diez y seis o pocos más años, recogidos
los cabellos con una redecilla de oro y seda verde, hermosa como mil
perlas. Miráronla de arriba abajo, y vieron que venía con unas medias de
seda encarnada, con ligas de tafetán blanco y rapacejos de oro y aljófar;
los greguescos eran verdes, de tela de oro, y una saltaembarca o ropilla de
lo mesmo, suelta, debajo de la cual traía un jubón de tela finísima de oro
y blanco, y los zapatos eran blancos y de hombre. No traía espada ceñida,
sino una riquísima daga, y en los dedos, muchos y muy buenos anillos.
Finalmente, la moza parecía bien a todos, y ninguno la conoció de cuantos
la vieron, y los naturales del lugar dijeron que no podían pensar quién
fuese, y los consabidores de las burlas que se habían de hacer a Sancho
fueron los que más se admiraron, porque aquel suceso y hallazgo no venía
ordenado por ellos; y así, estaban dudosos, esperando en qué pararía el
caso.

Sancho quedó pasmado de la hermosura de la moza, y preguntóle quién era,
adónde iba y qué ocasión le había movido para vestirse en aquel hábito.
Ella, puestos los ojos en tierra con honestísima vergüenza, respondió:

-No puedo, señor, decir tan en público lo que tanto me importaba fuera
secreto; una cosa quiero que se entienda: que no soy ladrón ni persona
facinorosa, sino una doncella desdichada a quien la fuerza de unos celos ha
hecho romper el decoro que a la honestidad se debe.

Oyendo esto el mayordomo, dijo a Sancho:

-Haga, señor gobernador, apartar la gente, porque esta señora con menos
empacho pueda decir lo que quisiere.

Mandólo así el gobernador; apartáronse todos, si no fueron el mayordomo,
maestresala y el secretario. Viéndose, pues, solos, la doncella prosiguió
diciendo:

-«Yo, señores, soy hija de Pedro Pérez Mazorca, arrendador de las lanas
deste lugar, el cual suele muchas veces ir en casa de mi padre.»

-Eso no lleva camino -dijo el mayordomo-, señora, porque yo conozco muy
bien a Pedro Pérez y sé que no tiene hijo ninguno, ni varón ni hembra; y
más, que decís que es vuestro padre, y luego añadís que suele ir muchas
veces en casa de vuestro padre.

-Ya yo había dado en ello -dijo Sancho.

-Ahora, señores, yo estoy turbada, y no sé lo que me digo -respondió la
doncella-; pero la verdad es que yo soy hija de Diego de la Llana, que
todos vuesas mercedes deben de conocer.

-Aún eso lleva camino -respondió el mayordomo-, que yo conozco a Diego de
la Llana, y sé que es un hidalgo principal y rico, y que tiene un hijo y
una hija, y que después que enviudó no ha habido nadie en todo este lugar
que pueda decir que ha visto el rostro de su hija; que la tiene tan
encerrada que no da lugar al sol que la vea; y, con todo esto, la fama dice
que es en estremo hermosa.

-Así es la verdad -respondió la doncella-, y esa hija soy yo; si la fama
miente o no en mi hermosura ya os habréis, señores, desengañado, pues me
habéis visto.

Y, en esto, comenzó a llorar tiernamente; viendo lo cual el secretario, se
llegó al oído del maestresala y le dijo muy paso:

-Sin duda alguna que a esta pobre doncella le debe de haber sucedido algo
de importancia, pues en tal traje, y a tales horas, y siendo tan principal,
anda fuera de su casa.

-No hay dudar en eso -respondió el maestresala-; y más, que esa sospecha la
confirman sus lágrimas.

Sancho la consoló con las mejores razones que él supo, y le pidió que sin
temor alguno les dijese lo que le había sucedido; que todos procurarían
remediarlo con muchas veras y por todas las vías posibles.

-«Es el caso, señores -respondió ella-, que mi padre me ha tenido encerrada
diez años ha, que son los mismos que a mi madre come la tierra. En casa
dicen misa en un rico oratorio, y yo en todo este tiempo no he visto que el
sol del cielo de día, y la luna y las estrellas de noche, ni sé qué son
calles, plazas, ni templos, ni aun hombres, fuera de mi padre y de un
hermano mío, y de Pedro Pérez el arrendador, que, por entrar de ordinario
en mi casa, se me antojó decir que era mi padre, por no declarar el mío.
Este encerramiento y este negarme el salir de casa, siquiera a la iglesia,
ha muchos días y meses que me trae muy desconsolada; quisiera yo ver el
mundo, o, a lo menos, el pueblo donde nací, pareciéndome que este deseo no
iba contra el buen decoro que las doncellas principales deben guardar a sí
mesmas. Cuando oía decir que corrían toros y jugaban cañas, y se
representaban comedias, preguntaba a mi hermano, que es un año menor que
yo, que me dijese qué cosas eran aquéllas y otras muchas que yo no he
visto; él me lo declaraba por los mejores modos que sabía, pero todo era
encenderme más el deseo de verlo. Finalmente, por abreviar el cuento de mi
perdición, digo que yo rogué y pedí a mi hermano, que nunca tal pidiera ni
tal rogara...»

Y tornó a renovar el llanto. El mayordomo le dijo:

-Prosiga vuestra merced, señora, y acabe de decirnos lo que le ha sucedido,
que nos tienen a todos suspensos sus palabras y sus lágrimas.

-Pocas me quedan por decir -respondió la doncella-, aunque muchas lágrimas
sí que llorar, porque los mal colocados deseos no pueden traer consigo
otros descuentos que los semejantes.

Habíase sentado en el alma del maestresala la belleza de la doncella, y
llegó otra vez su lanterna para verla de nuevo; y parecióle que no eran
lágrimas las que lloraba, sino aljófar o rocío de los prados, y aun las
subía de punto y las llegaba a perlas orientales, y estaba deseando que su
desgracia no fuese tanta como daban a entender los indicios de su llanto y
de sus suspiros. Desesperábase el gobernador de la tardanza que tenía la
moza en dilatar su historia, y díjole que acabase de tenerlos más
suspensos, que era tarde y faltaba mucho que andar del pueblo. Ella, entre
interrotos sollozos y mal formados suspiros, dijo:

-«No es otra mi desgracia, ni mi infortunio es otro sino que yo rogué a mi
hermano que me vistiese en hábitos de hombre con uno de sus vestidos y que
me sacase una noche a ver todo el pueblo, cuando nuestro padre durmiese;
él, importunado de mis ruegos, condecendió con mi deseo, y, poniéndome este
vestido y él vestiéndose de otro mío, que le está como nacido, porque él no
tiene pelo de barba y no parece sino una doncella hermosísima, esta noche,
debe de haber una hora, poco más o menos, nos salimos de casa; y, guiados
de nuestro mozo y desbaratado discurso, hemos rodeado todo el pueblo, y
cuando queríamos volver a casa, vimos venir un gran tropel de gente, y mi
hermano me dijo: ''Hermana, ésta debe de ser la ronda: aligera los pies y
pon alas en ellos, y vente tras mí corriendo, porque no nos conozcan, que
nos será mal contado''. Y, diciendo esto, volvió las espaldas y comenzó, no
digo a correr, sino a volar; yo, a menos de seis pasos, caí, con el
sobresalto, y entonces llegó el ministro de la justicia que me trujo ante
vuestras mercedes, adonde, por mala y antojadiza, me veo avergonzada ante
tanta gente.»

-¿En efecto, señora -dijo Sancho-, no os ha sucedido otro desmán alguno, ni
celos, como vos al principio de vuestro cuento dijistes, no os sacaron de
vuestra casa?

-No me ha sucedido nada, ni me sacaron celos, sino sólo el deseo de ver
mundo, que no se estendía a más que a ver las calles de este lugar.

Y acabó de confirmar ser verdad lo que la doncella decía llegar los
corchetes con su hermano preso, a quien alcanzó uno dellos cuando se huyó
de su hermana. No traía sino un faldellín rico y una mantellina de damasco
azul con pasamanos de oro fino, la cabeza sin toca ni con otra cosa
adornada que con sus mesmos cabellos, que eran sortijas de oro, según eran
rubios y enrizados. Apartáronse con el gobernador, mayordomo y maestresala,
y, sin que lo oyese su hermana, le preguntaron cómo venía en aquel traje, y
él, con no menos vergüenza y empacho, contó lo mesmo que su hermana había
contado, de que recibió gran gusto el enamorado maestresala. Pero el
gobernador les dijo:

-Por cierto, señores, que ésta ha sido una gran rapacería, y para contar
esta necedad y atrevimiento no eran menester tantas largas, ni tantas
lágrimas y suspiros; que con decir: ''Somos fulano y fulana, que nos
salimos a espaciar de casa de nuestros padres con esta invención, sólo por
curiosidad, sin otro designio alguno'', se acabara el cuento, y no
gemidicos, y lloramicos, y darle.

-Así es la verdad -respondió la doncella-, pero sepan vuesas mercedes que
la turbación que he tenido ha sido tanta, que no me ha dejado guardar el
término que debía.

-No se ha perdido nada -respondió Sancho-. Vamos, y dejaremos a vuesas
mercedes en casa de su padre; quizá no los habrá echado menos. Y, de aquí
adelante, no se muestren tan niños, ni tan deseosos de ver mundo, que la
doncella honrada, la pierna quebrada, y en casa; y la mujer y la gallina,
por andar se pierden aína; y la que es deseosa de ver, también tiene deseo
de ser vista. No digo más.

El mancebo agradeció al gobernador la merced que quería hacerles de
volverlos a su casa, y así, se encaminaron hacia ella, que no estaba muy
lejos de allí. Llegaron, pues, y, tirando el hermano una china a una reja,
al momento bajó una criada, que los estaba esperando, y les abrió la
puerta, y ellos se entraron, dejando a todos admirados, así de su gentileza
y hermosura como del deseo que tenían de ver mundo, de noche y sin salir
del lugar; pero todo lo atribuyeron a su poca edad.

Quedó el maestresala traspasado su corazón, y propuso de luego otro día
pedírsela por mujer a su padre, teniendo por cierto que no se la negaría,
por ser él criado del duque; y aun a Sancho le vinieron deseos y barruntos
de casar al mozo con Sanchica, su hija, y determinó de ponerlo en plática a
su tiempo, dándose a entender que a una hija de un gobernador ningún marido
se le podía negar.

Con esto, se acabó la ronda de aquella noche, y de allí a dos días el
gobierno, con que se destroncaron y borraron todos sus designios, como se
verá adelante.





Capítulo L. Donde se declara quién fueron los encantadores y verdugos que
azotaron a la dueña y pellizcaron y arañaron a don Quijote, con el suceso
que tuvo el paje que llevó la carta a Teresa Sancha, mujer de Sancho Panza


Dice Cide Hamete, puntualísimo escudriñador de los átomos desta verdadera
historia, que al tiempo que doña Rodríguez salió de su aposento para ir a
la estancia de don Quijote, otra dueña que con ella dormía lo sintió, y
que, como todas las dueñas son amigas de saber, entender y oler, se fue
tras ella, con tanto silencio, que la buena Rodríguez no lo echó de ver; y,
así como la dueña la vio entrar en la estancia de don Quijote, porque no
faltase en ella la general costumbre que todas las dueñas tienen de ser
chismosas, al momento lo fue a poner en pico a su señora la duquesa, de
cómo doña Rodríguez quedaba en el aposento de don Quijote.

La duquesa se lo dijo al duque, y le pidió licencia para que ella y
Altisidora viniesen a ver lo que aquella dueña quería con don Quijote; el
duque se la dio, y las dos, con gran tiento y sosiego, paso ante paso,
llegaron a ponerse junto a la puerta del aposento, y tan cerca, que oían
todo lo que dentro hablaban; y, cuando oyó la duquesa que Rodríguez había
echado en la calle el Aranjuez de sus fuentes, no lo pudo sufrir, ni menos
Altisidora; y así, llenas de cólera y deseosas de venganza, entraron de
golpe en el aposento, y acrebillaron a don Quijote y vapularon a la dueña
del modo que queda contado; porque las afrentas que van derechas contra la
hermosura y presunción de las mujeres, despierta en ellas en gran manera la
ira y enciende el deseo de vengarse.

Contó la duquesa al duque lo que le había pasado, de lo que se holgó mucho,
y la duquesa, prosiguiendo con su intención de burlarse y recibir
pasatiempo con don Quijote, despachó al paje que había hecho la figura de
Dulcinea en el concierto de su desencanto -que tenía bien olvidado Sancho
Panza con la ocupación de su gobierno- a Teresa Panza, su mujer, con la
carta de su marido, y con otra suya, y con una gran sarta de corales ricos
presentados.

Dice, pues, la historia, que el paje era muy discreto y agudo, y, con deseo
de servir a sus señores, partió de muy buena gana al lugar de Sancho; y,
antes de entrar en él, vio en un arroyo estar lavando cantidad de mujeres,
a quien preguntó si le sabrían decir si en aquel lugar vivía una mujer
llamada Teresa Panza, mujer de un cierto Sancho Panza, escudero de un
caballero llamado don Quijote de la Mancha, a cuya pregunta se levantó en
pie una mozuela que estaba lavando, y dijo:

-Esa Teresa Panza es mi madre, y ese tal Sancho, mi señor padre, y el tal
caballero, nuestro amo.

-Pues venid, doncella -dijo el paje-, y mostradme a vuestra madre, porque
le traigo una carta y un presente del tal vuestro padre.

-Eso haré yo de muy buena gana, señor mío -respondió la moza, que mostraba
ser de edad de catorce años, poco más a menos.

Y, dejando la ropa que lavaba a otra compañera, sin tocarse ni calzarse,
que estaba en piernas y desgreñada, saltó delante de la cabalgadura del
paje, y dijo:

-Venga vuesa merced, que a la entrada del pueblo está nuestra casa, y mi
madre en ella, con harta pena por no haber sabido muchos días ha de mi
señor padre.

-Pues yo se las llevo tan buenas -dijo el paje- que tiene que dar bien
gracias a Dios por ellas.

Finalmente, saltando, corriendo y brincando, llegó al pueblo la muchacha,
y, antes de entrar en su casa, dijo a voces desde la puerta:

-Salga, madre Teresa, salga, salga, que viene aquí un señor que trae cartas
y otras cosas de mi buen padre.

A cuyas voces salió Teresa Panza, su madre, hilando un copo de estopa, con
una saya parda. Parecía, según era de corta, que se la habían cortado por
vergonzoso lugar, con un corpezuelo asimismo pardo y una camisa de pechos.
No era muy vieja, aunque mostraba pasar de los cuarenta, pero fuerte,
tiesa, nervuda y avellanada; la cual, viendo a su hija, y al paje a
caballo, le dijo:

-¿Qué es esto, niña? ¿Qué señor es éste?

-Es un servidor de mi señora doña Teresa Panza -respondió el paje.

Y, diciendo y haciendo, se arrojó del caballo y se fue con mucha humildad a
poner de hinojos ante la señora Teresa, diciendo:

-Déme vuestra merced sus manos, mi señora doña Teresa, bien así como mujer
legítima y particular del señor don Sancho Panza, gobernador propio de la
ínsula Barataria.

-¡Ay, señor mío, quítese de ahí; no haga eso -respondió Teresa-, que yo no
soy nada palaciega, sino una pobre labradora, hija de un estripaterrones y
mujer de un escudero andante, y no de gobernador alguno!

-Vuesa merced -respondió el paje- es mujer dignísima de un gobernador
archidignísimo; y, para prueba desta verdad, reciba vuesa merced esta carta
y este presente.

Y sacó al instante de la faldriquera una sarta de corales con estremos de
oro, y se la echó al cuello y dijo:

-Esta carta es del señor gobernador, y otra que traigo y estos corales son
de mi señora la duquesa, que a vuestra merced me envía.

Quedó pasmada Teresa, y su hija ni más ni menos, y la muchacha dijo:

-Que me maten si no anda por aquí nuestro señor amo don Quijote, que debe
de haber dado a padre el gobierno o condado que tantas veces le había
prometido.

-Así es la verdad -respondió el paje-: que, por respeto del señor don
Quijote, es ahora el señor Sancho gobernador de la ínsula Barataria, como
se verá por esta carta.

-Léamela vuesa merced, señor gentilhombre -dijo Teresa-, porque, aunque yo
sé hilar, no sé leer migaja.

-Ni yo tampoco -añadió Sanchica-; pero espérenme aquí, que yo iré a llamar
quien la lea, ora sea el cura mesmo, o el bachiller Sansón Carrasco, que
vendrán de muy buena gana, por saber nuevas de mi padre.

-No hay para qué se llame a nadie, que yo no sé hilar, pero sé leer, y la
leeré.

Y así, se la leyó toda, que, por quedar ya referida, no se pone aquí; y
luego sacó otra de la duquesa, que decía desta manera:

Amiga Teresa:

Las buenas partes de la bondad y del ingenio de vuestro marido Sancho me
movieron y obligaron a pedir a mi marido el duque le diese un gobierno de
una ínsula, de muchas que tiene. Tengo noticia que gobierna como un
girifalte, de lo que yo estoy muy contenta, y el duque mi señor, por el
consiguiente; por lo que doy muchas gracias al cielo de no haberme engañado
en haberle escogido para el tal gobierno; porque quiero que sepa la señora
Teresa que con dificultad se halla un buen gobernador en el mundo, y tal me
haga a mí Dios como Sancho gobierna.

Ahí le envío, querida mía, una sarta de corales con estremos de oro; yo me
holgara que fuera de perlas orientales, pero quien te da el hueso, no te
querría ver muerta: tiempo vendrá en que nos conozcamos y nos comuniquemos,
y Dios sabe lo que será. Encomiéndeme a Sanchica, su hija, y dígale de mi
parte que se apareje, que la tengo de casar altamente cuando menos lo
piense.

Dícenme que en ese lugar hay bellotas gordas: envíeme hasta dos docenas,
que las estimaré en mucho, por ser de su mano, y escríbame largo,
avisándome de su salud y de su bienestar; y si hubiere menester alguna
cosa, no tiene que hacer más que boquear: que su boca será medida, y Dios
me la guarde. Deste lugar.

Su amiga, que bien la quiere,

La Duquesa.

-¡Ay -dijo Teresa en oyendo la carta-, y qué buena y qué llana y qué
humilde señora! Con estas tales señoras me entierren a mí, y no las
hidalgas que en este pueblo se usan, que piensan que por ser hidalgas no
las ha de tocar el viento, y van a la iglesia con tanta fantasía como si
fuesen las mesmas reinas, que no parece sino que tienen a deshonra el mirar
a una labradora; y veis aquí donde esta buena señora, con ser duquesa, me
llama amiga, y me trata como si fuera su igual, que igual la vea yo con el
más alto campanario que hay en la Mancha. Y, en lo que toca a las bellotas,
señor mío, yo le enviaré a su señoría un celemín, que por gordas las pueden
venir a ver a la mira y a la maravilla. Y por ahora, Sanchica, atiende a
que se regale este señor: pon en orden este caballo, y saca de la
caballeriza güevos, y corta tocino adunia, y démosle de comer como a un
príncipe, que las buenas nuevas que nos ha traído y la buena cara que él
tiene lo merece todo; y, en tanto, saldré yo a dar a mis vecinas las nuevas
de nuestro contento, y al padre cura y a maese Nicolás el barbero, que tan
amigos son y han sido de tu padre.

-Sí haré, madre -respondió Sanchica-; pero mire que me ha de dar la mitad
desa sarta; que no tengo yo por tan boba a mi señora la duquesa, que se la
había de enviar a ella toda.

-Todo es para ti, hija -respondió Teresa-, pero déjamela traer algunos
días al cuello, que verdaderamente parece que me alegra el corazón.

-También se alegrarán -dijo el paje- cuando vean el lío que viene en este
portamanteo, que es un vestido de paño finísimo que el gobernador sólo un
día llevó a caza, el cual todo le envía para la señora Sanchica.

-Que me viva él mil años -respondió Sanchica-, y el que lo trae, ni más ni
menos, y aun dos mil, si fuere necesidad.

Salióse en esto Teresa fuera de casa, con las cartas, y con la sarta al
cuello, y iba tañendo en las cartas como si fuera en un pandero; y,
encontrándose acaso con el cura y Sansón Carrasco, comenzó a bailar y a
decir:

-¡A fee que agora que no hay pariente pobre! ¡Gobiernito tenemos! ¡No, sino
tómese conmigo la más pintada hidalga, que yo la pondré como nueva!

-¿Qué es esto, Teresa Panza? ¿Qué locuras son éstas, y qué papeles son
ésos?

-No es otra la locura sino que éstas son cartas de duquesas y de
gobernadores, y estos que traigo al cuello son corales finos; las avemarías
y los padres nuestros son de oro de martillo, y yo soy gobernadora.

-De Dios en ayuso, no os entendemos, Teresa, ni sabemos lo que os decís.

-Ahí lo podrán ver ellos -respondió Teresa.

Y dioles las cartas. Leyólas el cura de modo que las oyó Sansón Carrasco, y
Sansón y el cura se miraron el uno al otro, como admirados de lo que habían
leído; y preguntó el bachiller quién había traído aquellas cartas.
Respondió Teresa que se viniesen con ella a su casa y verían el mensajero,
que era un mancebo como un pino de oro, y que le traía otro presente que
valía más de tanto. Quitóle el cura los corales del cuello, y mirólos y
remirólos, y, certificándose que eran finos, tornó a admirarse de nuevo, y
dijo:

-Por el hábito que tengo, que no sé qué me diga ni qué me piense de estas
cartas y destos presentes: por una parte, veo y toco la fineza de estos
corales, y por otra, leo que una duquesa envía a pedir dos docenas de
bellotas.

-¡Aderézame esas medidas! -dijo entonces Carrasco-. Agora bien, vamos a ver
al portador deste pliego, que dél nos informaremos de las dificultades que
se nos ofrecen.

Hiciéronlo así, y volvióse Teresa con ellos. Hallaron al paje cribando un
poco de cebada para su cabalgadura, y a Sanchica cortando un torrezno para
empedrarle con güevos y dar de comer al paje, cuya presencia y buen adorno
contentó mucho a los dos; y, después de haberle saludado cortésmente, y él
a ellos, le preguntó Sansón les dijese nuevas así de don Quijote como de
Sancho Panza; que, puesto que habían leído las cartas de Sancho y de la
señora duquesa, todavía estaban confusos y no acababan de atinar qué sería
aquello del gobierno de Sancho, y más de una ínsula, siendo todas o las más
que hay en el mar Mediterráneo de Su Majestad. A lo que el paje respondió:

-De que el señor Sancho Panza sea gobernador, no hay que dudar en ello; de
que sea ínsula o no la que gobierna, en eso no me entremeto, pero basta que
sea un lugar de más de mil vecinos; y, en cuanto a lo de las bellotas, digo
que mi señora la duquesa es tan llana y tan humilde, que no -decía él-
enviar a pedir bellotas a una labradora, pero que le acontecía enviar a
pedir un peine prestado a una vecina suya. Porque quiero que sepan vuestras
mercedes que las señoras de Aragón, aunque son tan principales, no son tan
puntuosas y levantadas como las señoras castellanas; con más llaneza tratan
con las gentes.

Estando en la mitad destas pláticas, saltó Sanchica con un halda de güevos,
y preguntó al paje:

-Dígame, señor: ¿mi señor padre trae por ventura calzas atacadas después
que es gobernador?

-No he mirado en ello -respondió el paje-, pero sí debe de traer.

-¡Ay Dios mío -replicó Sanchica-, y que será de ver a mi padre con
pedorreras! ¿No es bueno sino que desde que nací tengo deseo de ver a mi
padre con calzas atacadas?

-Como con esas cosas le verá vuestra merced si vive -respondió el paje-.
Par Dios, términos lleva de caminar con papahígo, con solos dos meses que
le dure el gobierno.

Bien echaron de ver el cura y el bachiller que el paje hablaba
socarronamente, pero la fineza de los corales y el vestido de caza que
Sancho enviaba lo deshacía todo; que ya Teresa les había mostrado el
vestido. Y no dejaron de reírse del deseo de Sanchica, y más cuando Teresa
dijo:

-Señor cura, eche cata por ahí si hay alguien que vaya a Madrid, o a
Toledo, para que me compre un verdugado redondo, hecho y derecho, y sea al
uso y de los mejores que hubiere; que en verdad en verdad que tengo de
honrar el gobierno de mi marido en cuanto yo pudiere, y aun que si me
enojo, me tengo de ir a esa corte, y echar un coche, como todas; que la que
tiene marido gobernador muy bien le puede traer y sustentar.

-Y ¡cómo, madre! -dijo Sanchica-. Pluguiese a Dios que fuese antes hoy que
mañana, aunque dijesen los que me viesen ir sentada con mi señora madre en
aquel coche: ''¡Mirad la tal por cual, hija del harto de ajos, y cómo va
sentada y tendida en el coche, como si fuera una papesa!'' Pero pisen ellos
los lodos, y ándeme yo en mi coche, levantados los pies del suelo. ¡Mal
año y mal mes para cuantos murmuradores hay en el mundo, y ándeme yo
caliente, y ríase la gente! ¿Digo bien, madre mía?

-Y ¡cómo que dices bien, hija! -respondió Teresa-. Y todas estas venturas,
y aun mayores, me las tiene profetizadas mi buen Sancho, y verás tú, hija,
cómo no para hasta hacerme condesa: que todo es comenzar a ser venturosas;
y, como yo he oído decir muchas veces a tu buen padre, que así como lo es
tuyo lo es de los refranes, cuando te dieren la vaquilla, corre con
soguilla: cuando te dieren un gobierno, cógele; cuando te dieren un
condado, agárrale, y cuando te hicieren tus, tus, con alguna buena dádiva,
envásala. ¡No, sino dormíos, y no respondáis a las venturas y buenas dichas
que están llamando a la puerta de vuestra casa!

-Y ¿qué se me da a mí -añadió Sanchica- que diga el que quisiere cuando me
vea entonada y fantasiosa: "Viose el perro en bragas de cerro...", y lo
demás?

Oyendo lo cual el cura, dijo:

-Yo no puedo creer sino que todos los deste linaje de los Panzas nacieron
cada uno con un costal de refranes en el cuerpo: ninguno dellos he visto
que no los derrame a todas horas y en todas las pláticas que tienen.

-Así es la verdad -dijo el paje-, que el señor gobernador Sancho a cada
paso los dice, y, aunque muchos no vienen a propósito, todavía dan gusto, y
mi señora la duquesa y el duque los celebran mucho.

-¿Que todavía se afirma vuestra merced, señor mío -dijo el bachiller-, ser
verdad esto del gobierno de Sancho, y de que hay duquesa en el mundo que le
envíe presentes y le escriba? Porque nosotros, aunque tocamos los presentes
y hemos leído las cartas, no lo creemos, y pensamos que ésta es una de las
cosas de don Quijote, nuestro compatrioto, que todas piensa que son hechas
por encantamento; y así, estoy por decir que quiero tocar y palpar a
vuestra merced, por ver si es embajador fantástico o hombre de carne y
hueso.

-Señores, yo no sé más de mí -respondió el paje- sino que soy embajador
verdadero, y que el señor Sancho Panza es gobernador efectivo, y que mis
señores duque y duquesa pueden dar, y han dado, el tal gobierno; y que he
oído decir que en él se porta valentísimamente el tal Sancho Panza; si en
esto hay encantamento o no, vuestras mercedes lo disputen allá entre ellos,
que yo no sé otra cosa, para el juramento que hago, que es por vida de mis
padres, que los tengo vivos y los amo y los quiero mucho.

-Bien podrá ello ser así -replicó el bachiller-, pero dubitat Augustinus.

-Dude quien dudare -respondió el paje-, la verdad es la que he dicho, y
esta que ha de andar siempre sobre la mentira,como el aceite sobre el agua;
y si no, operibus credite, et non verbis: véngase alguno de vuesas mercedes
conmigo, y verán con los ojos lo que no creen por los oídos.

-Esa ida a mí toca -dijo Sanchica-: lléveme vuestra merced, señor, a las
ancas de su rocín, que yo iré de muy buena gana a ver a mi señor padre.

-Las hijas de los gobernadores no han de ir solas por los caminos, sino
acompañadas de carrozas y literas y de gran número de sirvientes.

-Par Dios -respondió Sancha-, tan bién me vaya yo sobre una pollina como
sobre un coche. ¡Hallado la habéis la melindrosa!

-Calla, mochacha -dijo Teresa-, que no sabes lo que te dices, y este señor
está en lo cierto: que tal el tiempo, tal el tiento; cuando Sancho, Sancha,
y cuando gobernador, señora, y no sé si diga algo.

-Más dice la señora Teresa de lo que piensa -dijo el paje-; y denme de
comer y despáchenme luego, porque pienso volverme esta tarde.

A lo que dijo el cura:

-Vuestra merced se vendrá a hacer penitencia conmigo, que la señora Teresa
más tiene voluntad que alhajas para servir a tan buen huésped.

Rehusólo el paje; pero, en efecto, lo hubo de conceder por su mejora, y el
cura le llevó consigo de buena gana, por tener lugar de preguntarle de
espacio por don Quijote y sus hazañas.

El bachiller se ofreció de escribir las cartas a Teresa de la respuesta,
pero ella no quiso que el bachiller se metiese en sus cosas, que le tenía
por algo burlón; y así, dio un bollo y dos huevos a un monacillo que sabía
escribir, el cual le escribió dos cartas, una para su marido y otra para la
duquesa, notadas de su mismo caletre, que no son las peores que en esta
grande historia se ponen, como se verá adelante.





Capítulo LI. Del progreso del gobierno de Sancho Panza, con otros sucesos
tales como buenos


Amaneció el día que se siguió a la noche de la ronda del gobernador, la
cual el maestresala pasó sin dormir, ocupado el pensamiento en el rostro,
brío y belleza de la disfrazada doncella; y el mayordomo ocupó lo que della
faltaba en escribir a sus señores lo que Sancho Panza hacía y decía, tan
admirado de sus hechos como de sus dichos: porque andaban mezcladas sus
palabras y sus acciones, con asomos discretos y tontos.

Levantóse, en fin, el señor gobernador, y, por orden del doctor Pedro
Recio, le hicieron desayunar con un poco de conserva y cuatro tragos de
agua fría, cosa que la trocara Sancho con un pedazo de pan y un racimo de
uvas; pero, viendo que aquello era más fuerza que voluntad, pasó por ello,
con harto dolor de su alma y fatiga de su estómago, haciéndole creer Pedro
Recio que los manjares pocos y delicados avivaban el ingenio, que era lo
que más convenía a las personas constituidas en mandos y en oficios graves,
donde se han de aprovechar no tanto de las fuerzas corporales como de las
del entendimiento.

Con esta sofistería padecía hambre Sancho, y tal, que en su secreto
maldecía el gobierno y aun a quien se le había dado; pero, con su hambre y
con su conserva, se puso a juzgar aquel día, y lo primero que se le ofreció
fue una pregunta que un forastero le hizo, estando presentes a todo el
mayordomo y los demás acólitos, que fue:

-Señor, un caudaloso río dividía dos términos de un mismo señorío (y esté
vuestra merced atento, porque el caso es de importancia y algo
dificultoso). Digo, pues, que sobre este río estaba una puente, y al cabo
della, una horca y una como casa de audiencia, en la cual de ordinario
había cuatro jueces que juzgaban la ley que puso el dueño del río, de la
puente y del señorío, que era en esta forma: "Si alguno pasare por esta
puente de una parte a otra, ha de jurar primero adónde y a qué va; y si
jurare verdad, déjenle pasar; y si dijere mentira, muera por ello ahorcado
en la horca que allí se muestra, sin remisión alguna". Sabida esta ley y la
rigurosa condición della, pasaban muchos, y luego en lo que juraban se
echaba de ver que decían verdad, y los jueces los dejaban pasar
libremente. Sucedió, pues, que, tomando juramento a un hombre, juró y dijo
que para el juramento que hacía, que iba a morir en aquella horca que allí
estaba, y no a otra cosa. Repararon los jueces en el juramento y dijeron:
''Si a este hombre le dejamos pasar libremente, mintió en su juramento, y,
conforme a la ley, debe morir; y si le ahorcamos, él juró que iba a morir
en aquella horca, y, habiendo jurado verdad, por la misma ley debe ser
libre''. Pídese a vuesa merced, señor gobernador, qué harán los jueces del
tal hombre; que aun hasta agora están dudosos y suspensos. Y, habiendo
tenido noticia del agudo y elevado entendimiento de vuestra merced, me
enviaron a mí a que suplicase a vuestra merced de su parte diese su parecer
en tan intricado y dudoso caso.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Por cierto que esos señores jueces que a mí os envían lo pudieran haber
escusado, porque yo soy un hombre que tengo más de mostrenco que de agudo;
pero, con todo eso, repetidme otra vez el negocio de modo que yo le
entienda: quizá podría ser que diese en el hito.

Volvió otra y otra vez el preguntante a referir lo que primero había dicho,
y Sancho dijo:

-A mi parecer, este negocio en dos paletas le declararé yo, y es así: el
tal hombre jura que va a morir en la horca, y si muere en ella, juró
verdad, y por la ley puesta merece ser libre y que pase la puente; y si no
le ahorcan, juró mentira, y por la misma ley merece que le ahorquen.

-Así es como el señor gobernador dice -dijo el mensajero-; y cuanto a la
entereza y entendimiento del caso, no hay más que pedir ni que dudar.

-Digo yo, pues, agora -replicó Sancho- que deste hombre aquella parte que
juró verdad la dejen pasar, y la que dijo mentira la ahorquen, y desta
manera se cumplirá al pie de la letra la condición del pasaje.

-Pues, señor gobernador -replicó el preguntador-, será necesario que el tal
hombre se divida en partes, en mentirosa y verdadera; y si se divide, por
fuerza ha de morir, y así no se consigue cosa alguna de lo que la ley pide,
y es de necesidad espresa que se cumpla con ella.

-Venid acá, señor buen hombre -respondió Sancho-; este pasajero que decís,
o yo soy un porro, o él tiene la misma razón para morir que para vivir y
pasar la puente; porque si la verdad le salva, la mentira le condena
igualmente; y, siendo esto así, como lo es, soy de parecer que digáis a
esos señores que a mí os enviaron que, pues están en un fil las razones de
condenarle o asolverle, que le dejen pasar libremente, pues siempre es
alabado más el hacer bien que mal, y esto lo diera firmado de mi nombre, si
supiera firmar; y yo en este caso no he hablado de mío, sino que se me vino
a la memoria un precepto, entre otros muchos que me dio mi amo don Quijote
la noche antes que viniese a ser gobernador desta ínsula: que fue que,
cuando la justicia estuviese en duda, me decantase y acogiese a la
misericordia; y ha querido Dios que agora se me acordase, por venir en este
caso como de molde.

Así es -respondió el mayordomo-, y tengo para mí que el mismo Licurgo, que
dio leyes a los lacedemonios, no pudiera dar mejor sentencia que la que el
gran Panza ha dado. Y acábese con esto la audiencia desta mañana, y yo daré
orden como el señor gobernador coma muy a su gusto.

-Eso pido, y barras derechas -dijo Sancho-: denme de comer, y lluevan casos
y dudas sobre mí, que yo las despabilaré en el aire.

Cumplió su palabra el mayordomo, pareciéndole ser cargo de conciencia matar
de hambre a tan discreto gobernador; y más, que pensaba concluir con él
aquella misma noche haciéndole la burla última que traía en comisión de
hacerle.

Sucedió, pues, que, habiendo comido aquel día contra las reglas y aforismos
del doctor Tirteafuera, al levantar de los manteles, entró un correo con
una carta de don Quijote para el gobernador. Mandó Sancho al secretario que
la leyese para sí, y que si no viniese en ella alguna cosa digna de
secreto, la leyese en voz alta. Hízolo así el secretario, y, repasándola
primero, dijo:

-Bien se puede leer en voz alta, que lo que el señor don Quijote escribe a
vuestra merced merece estar estampado y escrito con letras de oro, y dice
así:

Carta de don Quijote de la Mancha a Sancho Panza, gobernador de la ínsula
Barataria

Cuando esperaba oír nuevas de tus descuidos e impertinencias, Sancho amigo,
las oí de tus discreciones, de que di por ello gracias particulares al
cielo, el cual del estiércol sabe levantar los pobres, y de los tontos
hacer discretos. Dícenme que gobiernas como si fueses hombre, y que eres
hombre como si fueses bestia, según es la humildad con que te tratas; y
quiero que adviertas, Sancho, que muchas veces conviene y es necesario, por
la autoridad del oficio, ir contra la humildad del corazón; porque el buen
adorno de la persona que está puesta en graves cargos ha de ser conforme a
lo que ellos piden, y no a la medida de lo que su humilde condición le
inclina. Vístete bien, que un palo compuesto no parece palo. No digo que
traigas dijes ni galas, ni que siendo juez te vistas como soldado, sino que
te adornes con el hábito que tu oficio requiere, con tal que sea limpio y
bien compuesto.

Para ganar la voluntad del pueblo que gobiernas, entre otras has de hacer
dos cosas: la una, ser bien criado con todos, aunque esto ya otra vez te lo
he dicho; y la otra, procurar la abundancia de los mantenimientos; que no
hay cosa que más fatigue el corazón de los pobres que la hambre y la
carestía.

No hagas muchas pragmáticas; y si las hicieres, procura que sean buenas, y,
sobre todo, que se guarden y cumplan; que las pragmáticas que no se
guardan, lo mismo es que si no lo fuesen; antes dan a entender que el
príncipe que tuvo discreción y autoridad para hacerlas, no tuvo valor para
hacer que se guardasen; y las leyes que atemorizan y no se ejecutan, vienen
a ser como la viga, rey de las ranas: que al principio las espantó, y con
el tiempo la menospreciaron y se subieron sobre ella.

Sé padre de las virtudes y padrastro de los vicios. No seas siempre
riguroso, ni siempre blando, y escoge el medio entre estos dos estremos,
que en esto está el punto de la discreción. Visita las cárceles, las
carnicerías y las plazas, que la presencia del gobernador en lugares tales
es de mucha importancia: consuela a los presos, que esperan la brevedad de
su despacho; es coco a los carniceros, que por entonces igualan los pesos,
y es espantajo a las placeras, por la misma razón. No te muestres, aunque
por ventura lo seas -lo cual yo no creo-, codicioso, mujeriego ni glotón;
porque, en sabiendo el pueblo y los que te tratan tu inclinación
determinada, por allí te darán batería, hasta derribarte en el profundo de
la perdición.

Mira y remira, pasa y repasa los consejos y documentos que te di por
escrito antes que de aquí partieses a tu gobierno, y verás como hallas en
ellos, si los guardas, una ayuda de costa que te sobrelleve los trabajos y
dificultades que a cada paso a los gobernadores se les ofrecen. Escribe a
tus señores y muéstrateles agradecido, que la ingratitud es hija de la
soberbia, y uno de los mayores pecados que se sabe, y la persona que es
agradecida a los que bien le han hecho, da indicio que también lo será a
Dios, que tantos bienes le hizo y de contino le hace.

La señora duquesa despachó un propio con tu vestido y otro presente a tu
mujer Teresa Panza; por momentos esperamos respuesta.

Yo he estado un poco mal dispuesto de un cierto gateamiento que me sucedió
no muy a cuento de mis narices; pero no fue nada, que si hay encantadores
que me maltraten, también los hay que me defiendan.

Avísame si el mayordomo que está contigo tuvo que ver en las acciones de la
Trifaldi, como tú sospechaste, y de todo lo que te sucediere me irás dando
aviso, pues es tan corto el camino; cuanto más, que yo pienso dejar presto
esta vida ociosa en que estoy, pues no nací para ella.

Un negocio se me ha ofrecido, que creo que me ha de poner en desgracia
destos señores; pero, aunque se me da mucho, no se me da nada, pues, en fin
en fin, tengo de cumplir antes con mi profesión que con su gusto, conforme
a lo que suele decirse: amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. Dígote este
latín porque me doy a entender que, después que eres gobernador, lo habrás
aprendido. Y a Dios, el cual te guarde de que ninguno te tenga lástima.

Tu amigo,

Don Quijote de la Mancha.

Oyó Sancho la carta con mucha atención, y fue celebrada y tenida por
discreta de los que la oyeron; y luego Sancho se levantó de la mesa, y,
llamando al secretario, se encerró con él en su estancia, y, sin dilatarlo
más, quiso responder luego a su señor don Quijote, y dijo al secretario
que, sin añadir ni quitar cosa alguna, fuese escribiendo lo que él le
dijese, y así lo hizo; y la carta de la respuesta fue del tenor siguiente:

Carta de Sancho Panza a don Quijote de la Mancha

La ocupación de mis negocios es tan grande que no tengo lugar para rascarme
la cabeza, ni aun para cortarme las uñas; y así, las traigo tan crecidas
cual Dios lo remedie. Digo esto, señor mío de mi alma, porque vuesa merced
no se espante si hasta agora no he dado aviso de mi bien o mal estar en
este gobierno, en el cual tengo más hambre que cuando andábamos los dos por
las selvas y por los despoblados.

Escribióme el duque, mi señor, el otro día, dándome aviso que habían
entrado en esta ínsula ciertas espías para matarme, y hasta agora yo no he
descubierto otra que un cierto doctor que está en este lugar asalariado
para matar a cuantos gobernadores aquí vinieren: llámase el doctor Pedro
Recio, y es natural de Tirteafuera: ¡porque vea vuesa merced qué nombre
para no temer que he de morir a sus manos! Este tal doctor dice él mismo de
sí mismo que él no cura las enfermedades cuando las hay, sino que las
previene, para que no vengan; y las medecinas que usa son dieta y más
dieta, hasta poner la persona en los huesos mondos, como si no fuese mayor
mal la flaqueza que la calentura. Finalmente, él me va matando de hambre, y
yo me voy muriendo de despecho, pues cuando pensé venir a este gobierno a
comer caliente y a beber frío, y a recrear el cuerpo entre sábanas de
holanda, sobre colchones de pluma, he venido a hacer penitencia, como si
fuera ermitaño; y, como no la hago de mi voluntad, pienso que, al cabo al
cabo, me ha de llevar el diablo.

Hasta agora no he tocado derecho ni llevado cohecho, y no puedo pensar en
qué va esto; porque aquí me han dicho que los gobernadores que a esta
ínsula suelen venir, antes de entrar en ella, o les han dado o les han
prestado los del pueblo muchos dineros, y que ésta es ordinaria usanza en
los demás que van a gobiernos, no solamente en éste.

Anoche, andando de ronda, topé una muy hermosa doncella en traje de varón y
un hermano suyo en hábito de mujer; de la moza se enamoró mi maestresala, y
la escogió en su imaginación para su mujer, según él ha dicho, y yo escogí
al mozo para mi yerno; hoy los dos pondremos en plática nuestros
pensamientos con el padre de entrambos, que es un tal Diego de la Llana,
hidalgo y cristiano viejo cuanto se quiere.

Yo visito las plazas, como vuestra merced me lo aconseja, y ayer hallé una
tendera que vendía avellanas nuevas, y averigüéle que había mezclado con
una hanega de avellanas nuevas otra de viejas, vanas y podridas; apliquélas
todas para los niños de la doctrina, que las sabrían bien distinguir, y
sentenciéla que por quince días no entrase en la plaza. Hanme dicho que lo
hice valerosamente; lo que sé decir a vuestra merced es que es fama en este
pueblo que no hay gente más mala que las placeras, porque todas son
desvergonzadas, desalmadas y atrevidas, y yo así lo creo, por las que he
visto en otros pueblos.

De que mi señora la duquesa haya escrito a mi mujer Teresa Panza y
enviádole el presente que vuestra merced dice, estoy muy satisfecho, y
procuraré de mostrarme agradecido a su tiempo: bésele vuestra merced las
manos de mi parte, diciendo que digo yo que no lo ha echado en saco roto,
como lo verá por la obra.

No querría que vuestra merced tuviese trabacuentas de disgusto con esos mis
señores, porque si vuestra merced se enoja con ellos, claro está que ha de
redundar en mi daño, y no será bien que, pues se me da a mí por consejo que
sea agradecido, que vuestra merced no lo sea con quien tantas mercedes le
tiene hechas y con tanto regalo ha sido tratado en su castillo.

Aquello del gateado no entiendo, pero imagino que debe de ser alguna de las
malas fechorías que con vuestra merced suelen usar los malos encantadores;
yo lo sabré cuando nos veamos.

Quisiera enviarle a vuestra merced alguna cosa, pero no sé qué envíe, si no
es algunos cañutos de jeringas, que para con vejigas los hacen en esta
ínsula muy curiosos; aunque si me dura el oficio, yo buscaré qué enviar de
haldas o de mangas.

Si me escribiere mi mujer Teresa Panza, pague vuestra merced el porte y
envíeme la carta,que tengo grandísimo deseo de saber del estado de mi casa,
de mi mujer y de mis hijos. Y con esto, Dios libre a vuestra merced de mal
intencionados encantadores, y a mí me saque con bien y en paz deste
gobierno, que lo dudo, porque le pienso dejar con la vida, según me trata
el doctor Pedro Recio.

Criado de vuestra merced,

Sancho Panza, el Gobernador.

Cerró la carta el secretario y despachó luego al correo; y, juntándose los
burladores de Sancho, dieron orden entre sí cómo despacharle del gobierno;
y aquella tarde la pasó Sancho en hacer algunas ordenanzas tocantes al buen
gobierno de la que él imaginaba ser ínsula, y ordenó que no hubiese
regatones de los bastimentos en la república, y que pudiesen meter en ella
vino de las partes que quisiesen, con aditamento que declarasen el lugar de
donde era, para ponerle el precio según su estimación, bondad y fama, y el
que lo aguase o le mudase el nombre, perdiese la vida por ello.

Moderó el precio de todo calzado, principalmente el de los zapatos, por
parecerle que corría con exorbitancia; puso tasa en los salarios de los
criados, que caminaban a rienda suelta por el camino del interese; puso
gravísimas penas a los que cantasen cantares lascivos y descompuestos, ni
de noche ni de día. Ordenó que ningún ciego cantase milagro en coplas si no
trujese testimonio auténtico de ser verdadero, por parecerle que los más
que los ciegos cantan son fingidos, en perjuicio de los verdaderos.

Hizo y creó un alguacil de pobres, no para que los persiguiese, sino para
que los examinase si lo eran, porque a la sombra de la manquedad fingida y
de la llaga falsa andan los brazos ladrones y la salud borracha. En
resolución: él ordenó cosas tan buenas que hasta hoy se guardan en aquel
lugar, y se nombran Las constituciones del gran gobernador Sancho Panza.





Capítulo LII. Donde se cuenta la aventura de la segunda dueña Dolorida, o
Angustiada, llamada por otro nombre doña Rodríguez


Cuenta Cide Hamete que estando ya don Quijote sano de sus aruños, le
pareció que la vida que en aquel castillo tenía era contra toda la orden de
caballería que profesaba, y así, determinó de pedir licencia a los duques
para partirse a Zaragoza, cuyas fiestas llegaban cerca, adonde pensaba
ganar el arnés que en las tales fiestas se conquista.

Y, estando un día a la mesa con los duques, y comenzando a poner en obra su
intención y pedir la licencia, veis aquí a deshora entrar por la puerta de
la gran sala dos mujeres, como después pareció, cubiertas de luto de los
pies a la cabeza, y la una dellas, llegándose a don Quijote, se le echó a
los pies tendida de largo a largo, la boca cosida con los pies de don
Quijote, y daba unos gemidos tan tristes, tan profundos y tan dolorosos,
que puso en confusión a todos los que la oían y miraban; y, aunque los
duques pensaron que sería alguna burla que sus criados querían hacer a don
Quijote, todavía, viendo con el ahínco que la mujer suspiraba, gemía y
lloraba, los tuvo dudosos y suspensos, hasta que don Quijote, compasivo, la
levantó del suelo y hizo que se descubriese y quitase el manto de sobre la
faz llorosa.

Ella lo hizo así, y mostró ser lo que jamás se pudiera pensar, porque
descubrió el rostro de doña Rodríguez, la dueña de casa, y la otra enlutada
era su hija, la burlada del hijo del labrador rico. Admiráronse todos
aquellos que la conocían, y más los duques que ninguno; que, puesto que la
tenían por boba y de buena pasta, no por tanto que viniese a hacer locuras.
Finalmente, doña Rodríguez, volviéndose a los señores, les dijo:

-Vuesas excelencias sean servidos de darme licencia que yo departa un poco
con este caballero, porque así conviene para salir con bien del negocio en
que me ha puesto el atrevimiento de un mal intencionado villano.

El duque dijo que él se la daba, y que departiese con el señor don Quijote
cuanto le viniese en deseo. Ella, enderezando la voz y el rostro a don
Quijote, dijo:

-Días ha, valeroso caballero, que os tengo dada cuenta de la sinrazón y
alevosía que un mal labrador tiene fecha a mi muy querida y amada fija, que
es esta desdichada que aquí está presente, y vos me habedes prometido de
volver por ella, enderezándole el tuerto que le tienen fecho, y agora ha
llegado a mi noticia que os queredes partir deste castillo, en busca de las
buenas venturas que Dios os depare; y así, querría que, antes que os
escurriésedes por esos caminos, desafiásedes a este rústico indómito, y le
hiciésedes que se casase con mi hija, en cumplimiento de la palabra que le
dio de ser su esposo, antes y primero que yogase con ella; porque pensar
que el duque mi señor me ha de hacer justicia es pedir peras al olmo, por
la ocasión que ya a vuesa merced en puridad tengo declarada. Y con esto,
Nuestro Señor dé a vuesa merced mucha salud, y a nosotras no nos desampare.

A cuyas razones respondió don Quijote, con mucha gravedad y prosopopeya:

-Buena dueña, templad vuestras lágrimas, o, por mejor decir, enjugadlas y
ahorrad de vuestros suspiros, que yo tomo a mi cargo el remedio de vuestra
hija, a la cual le hubiera estado mejor no haber sido tan fácil en creer
promesas de enamorados, las cuales, por la mayor parte, son ligeras de
prometer y muy pesadas de cumplir; y así, con licencia del duque mi señor,
yo me partiré luego en busca dese desalmado mancebo, y le hallaré, y le
desafiaré, y le mataré cada y cuando que se escusare de cumplir la
prometida palabra; que el principal asumpto de mi profesión es perdonar a
los humildes y castigar a los soberbios; quiero decir: acorrer a los
miserables y destruir a los rigurosos.

-No es menester -respondió el duque- que vuesa merced se ponga en trabajo
de buscar al rústico de quien esta buena dueña se queja, ni es menester
tampoco que vuesa merced me pida a mí licencia para desafiarle; que yo le
doy por desafiado, y tomo a mi cargo de hacerle saber este desafío, y que
le acete, y venga a responder por sí a este mi castillo, donde a entrambos
daré campo seguro, guardando todas las condiciones que en tales actos
suelen y deben guardarse, guardando igualmente su justicia a cada uno, como
están obligados a guardarla todos aquellos príncipes que dan campo franco a
los que se combaten en los términos de sus señoríos.

-Pues con ese seguro y con buena licencia de vuestra grandeza -replicó don
Quijote-, desde aquí digo que por esta vez renuncio a mi hidalguía, y me
allano y ajusto con la llaneza del dañador, y me hago igual con él,
habilitándole para poder combatir conmigo; y así, aunque ausente, le
desafío y repto, en razón de que hizo mal en defraudar a esta pobre, que
fue doncella y ya por su culpa no lo es, y que le ha de cumplir la palabra
que le dio de ser su legítimo esposo, o morir en la demanda.

Y luego, descalzándose un guante, le arrojó en mitad de la sala, y el duque
le alzó, diciendo que, como ya había dicho, él acetaba el tal desafío en
nombre de su vasallo, y señalaba el plazo de allí a seis días; y el campo,
en la plaza de aquel castillo; y las armas, las acostumbradas de los
caballeros: lanza y escudo, y arnés tranzado, con todas las demás piezas,
sin engaño, superchería o superstición alguna, examinadas y vistas por los
jueces del campo.

-Pero, ante todas cosas, es menester que esta buena dueña y esta mala
doncella pongan el derecho de su justicia en manos del señor don Quijote;
que de otra manera no se hará nada, ni llegará a debida ejecución el tal
desafío.

-Yo sí pongo -respondió la dueña.

-Y yo también -añadió la hija, toda llorosa y toda vergonzosa y de mal
talante.

Tomado, pues, este apuntamiento, y habiendo imaginado el duque lo que había
de hacer en el caso, las enlutadas se fueron, y ordenó la duquesa que de
allí adelante no las tratasen como a sus criadas, sino como a señoras
aventureras que venían a pedir justicia a su casa; y así, les dieron cuarto
aparte y las sirvieron como a forasteras, no sin espanto de las demás
criadas, que no sabían en qué había de parar la sandez y desenvoltura de
doña Rodríguez y de su malandante hija.

Estando en esto, para acabar de regocijar la fiesta y dar buen fin a la
comida, veis aquí donde entró por la sala el paje que llevó las cartas y
presentes a Teresa Panza, mujer del gobernador Sancho Panza, de cuya
llegada recibieron gran contento los duques, deseosos de saber lo que le
había sucedido en su viaje; y, preguntándoselo, respondió el paje que no lo
podía decir tan en público ni con breves palabras: que sus excelencias
fuesen servidos de dejarlo para a solas, y que entretanto se entretuviesen
con aquellas cartas. Y, sacando dos cartas, las puso en manos de la
duquesa. La una decía en el sobreescrito: Carta para mi señora la duquesa
tal, de no sé dónde, y la otra: A mi marido Sancho Panza, gobernador de la
ínsula Barataria, que Dios prospere más años que a mí. No se le cocía el
pan, como suele decirse, a la duquesa hasta leer su carta, y abriéndola y
leído para sí, y viendo que la podía leer en voz alta para que el duque y
los circunstantes la oyesen, leyó desta manera:

Carta de Teresa Panza a la Duquesa

Mucho contento me dio, señora mía, la carta que vuesa grandeza me escribió,
que en verdad que la tenía bien deseada. La sarta de corales es muy buena,
y el vestido de caza de mi marido no le va en zaga. De que vuestra señoría
haya hecho gobernador a Sancho, mi consorte, ha recebido mucho gusto todo
este lugar, puesto que no hay quien lo crea, principalmente el cura, y mase
Nicolás el barbero, y Sansón Carrasco el bachiller; pero a mí no se me da
nada; que, como ello sea así, como lo es, diga cada uno lo que quisiere;
aunque, si va a decir verdad, a no venir los corales y el vestido, tampoco
yo lo creyera, porque en este pueblo todos tienen a mi marido por un porro,
y que, sacado de gobernar un hato de cabras, no pueden imaginar para qué
gobierno pueda ser bueno. Dios lo haga, y lo encamine como vee que lo han
menester sus hijos.

Yo, señora de mi alma, estoy determinada, con licencia de vuesa merced, de
meter este buen día en mi casa, yéndome a la corte a tenderme en un coche,
para quebrar los ojos a mil envidiosos que ya tengo; y así, suplico a vuesa
excelencia mande a mi marido me envíe algún dinerillo, y que sea algo qué,
porque en la corte son los gastos grandes: que el pan vale a real, y la
carne, la libra, a treinta maravedís, que es un juicio; y si quisiere que
no vaya, que me lo avise con tiempo, porque me están bullendo los pies por
ponerme en camino; que me dicen mis amigas y mis vecinas que, si yo y mi
hija andamos orondas y pomposas en la corte, vendrá a ser conocido mi
marido por mí más que yo por él, siendo forzoso que pregunten muchos:
''-¿Quién son estas señoras deste coche?'' Y un criado mío responder: ''-La
mujer y la hija de Sancho Panza, gobernador de la ínsula Barataria''; y
desta manera será conocido Sancho, y yo seré estimada, y a Roma por todo.

Pésame, cuanto pesarme puede, que este año no se han cogido bellotas en
este pueblo; con todo eso, envío a vuesa alteza hasta medio celemín, que
una a una las fui yo a coger y a escoger al monte, y no las hallé más
mayores; yo quisiera que fueran como huevos de avestruz.

No se le olvide a vuestra pomposidad de escribirme, que yo tendré cuidado
de la respuesta, avisando de mi salud y de todo lo que hubiere que avisar
deste lugar, donde quedo rogando a Nuestro Señor guarde a vuestra grandeza,
y a mí no olvide. Sancha, mi hija, y mi hijo besan a vuestra merced las
manos.

La que tiene más deseo de ver a vuestra señoría que de escribirla, su
criada,

Teresa Panza.

Grande fue el gusto que todos recibieron de oír la carta de Teresa Panza,
principalmente los duques, y la duquesa pidió parecer a don Quijote si
sería bien abrir la carta que venía para el gobernador, que imaginaba debía
de ser bonísima. Don Quijote dijo que él la abriría por darles gusto, y así
lo hizo, y vio que decía desta manera:

Carta de Teresa Panza a Sancho Panza su marido

Tu carta recibí, Sancho mío de mi alma, y yo te prometo y juro como
católica cristiana que no faltaron dos dedos para volverme loca de
contento. Mira, hermano: cuando yo llegué a oír que eres gobernador, me
pensé allí caer muerta de puro gozo, que ya sabes tú que dicen que así mata
la alegría súbita como el dolor grande. A Sanchica, tu hija, se le fueron
las aguas sin sentirlo, de puro contento. El vestido que me enviaste tenía
delante, y los corales que me envió mi señora la duquesa al cuello, y las
cartas en las manos, y el portador dellas allí presente, y, con todo eso,
creía y pensaba que era todo sueño lo que veía y lo que tocaba; porque,
¿quién podía pensar que un pastor de cabras había de venir a ser gobernador
de ínsulas? Ya sabes tú, amigo, que decía mi madre que era menester vivir
mucho para ver mucho: dígolo porque pienso ver más si vivo más; porque no
pienso parar hasta verte arrendador o alcabalero, que son oficios que,
aunque lleva el diablo a quien mal los usa, en fin en fin, siempre tienen y
manejan dineros. Mi señora la duquesa te dirá el deseo que tengo de ir a la
corte; mírate en ello, y avísame de tu gusto, que yo procuraré honrarte en
ella andando en coche.

El cura, el barbero, el bachiller y aun el sacristán no pueden creer que
eres gobernador, y dicen que todo es embeleco, o cosas de encantamento,
como son todas las de don Quijote tu amo; y dice Sansón que ha de ir a
buscarte y a sacarte el gobierno de la cabeza, y a don Quijote la locura de
los cascos; yo no hago sino reírme, y mirar mi sarta, y dar traza del
vestido que tengo de hacer del tuyo a nuestra hija.

Unas bellotas envié a mi señora la duquesa; yo quisiera que fueran de oro.
Envíame tú algunas sartas de perlas, si se usan en esa ínsula.

Las nuevas deste lugar son que la Berrueca casó a su hija con un pintor de
mala mano, que llegó a este pueblo a pintar lo que saliese; mandóle el
Concejo pintar las armas de Su Majestad sobre las puertas del Ayuntamiento,
pidió dos ducados, diéronselos adelantados, trabajó ocho días, al cabo de
los cuales no pintó nada, y dijo que no acertaba a pintar tantas baratijas;
volvió el dinero, y, con todo eso, se casó a título de buen oficial; verdad
es que ya ha dejado el pincel y tomado el azada, y va al campo como
gentilhombre. El hijo de Pedro de Lobo se ha ordenado de grados y corona,
con intención de hacerse clérigo; súpolo Minguilla, la nieta de Mingo
Silvato, y hale puesto demanda de que la tiene dada palabra de casamiento;
malas lenguas quieren decir que ha estado encinta dél, pero él lo niega a
pies juntillas.

Hogaño no hay aceitunas, ni se halla una gota de vinagre en todo este
pueblo. Por aquí pasó una compañía de soldados; lleváronse de camino tres
mozas deste pueblo; no te quiero decir quién son: quizá volverán, y no
faltará quien las tome por mujeres, con sus tachas buenas o malas.

Sanchica hace puntas de randas; gana cada día ocho maravedís horros, que
los va echando en una alcancía para ayuda a su ajuar; pero ahora que es
hija de un gobernador, tú le darás la dote sin que ella lo trabaje. La
fuente de la plaza se secó; un rayo cayó en la picota, y allí me las den
todas.

Espero respuesta désta y la resolución de mi ida a la corte; y, con esto,
Dios te me guarde más años que a mí o tantos, porque no querría dejarte sin
mí en este mundo.

Tu mujer,

Teresa Panza.

Las cartas fueron solenizadas, reídas, estimadas y admiradas; y, para
acabar de echar el sello, llegó el correo, el que traía la que Sancho
enviaba a don Quijote, que asimesmo se leyó públicamente, la cual puso en
duda la sandez del gobernador.

Retiróse la duquesa, para saber del paje lo que le había sucedido en el
lugar de Sancho, el cual se lo contó muy por estenso, sin dejar
circunstancia que no refiriese; diole las bellotas, y más un queso que
Teresa le dio, por ser muy bueno, que se aventajaba a los de Tronchón
Recibiólo la duquesa con grandísimo gusto, con el cual la dejaremos, por
contar el fin que tuvo el gobierno del gran Sancho Panza, flor y espejo de
todos los insulanos gobernadores.





Capítulo LIII. Del fatigado fin y remate que tuvo el gobierno de Sancho
Panza


''Pensar que en esta vida las cosas della han de durar siempre en un estado
es pensar en lo escusado; antes parece que ella anda todo en redondo, digo,
a la redonda: la primavera sigue al verano, el verano al estío, el estío al
otoño, y el otoño al invierno, y el invierno a la primavera, y así torna a
andarse el tiempo con esta rueda continua; sola la vida humana corre a su
fin ligera más que el tiempo, sin esperar renovarse si no es en la otra,
que no tiene términos que la limiten''. Esto dice Cide Hamete, filósofo
mahomético; porque esto de entender la ligereza e instabilidad de la vida
presente, y de la duración de la eterna que se espera, muchos sin lumbre de
fe, sino con la luz natural, lo han entendido; pero aquí, nuestro autor lo
dice por la presteza con que se acabó, se consumió, se deshizo, se fue como
en sombra y humo el gobierno de Sancho.

El cual, estando la séptima noche de los días de su gobierno en su cama, no
harto de pan ni de vino, sino de juzgar y dar pareceres y de hacer
estatutos y pragmáticas, cuando el sueño, a despecho y pesar de la hambre,
le comenzaba a cerrar los párpados, oyó tan gran ruido de campanas y de
voces, que no parecía sino que toda la ínsula se hundía. Sentóse en la
cama, y estuvo atento y escuchando, por ver si daba en la cuenta de lo que
podía ser la causa de tan grande alboroto; pero no sólo no lo supo, pero,
añadiéndose al ruido de voces y campanas el de infinitas trompetas y
atambores, quedó más confuso y lleno de temor y espanto; y, levantándose en
pie, se puso unas chinelas, por la humedad del suelo, y, sin ponerse
sobrerropa de levantar, ni cosa que se pareciese, salió a la puerta de su
aposento, a tiempo cuando vio venir por unos corredores más de veinte
personas con hachas encendidas en las manos y con las espadas
desenvainadas, gritando todos a grandes voces:

-¡Arma, arma, señor gobernador, arma!; que han entrado infinitos enemigos
en la ínsula, y somos perdidos si vuestra industria y valor no nos socorre.

Con este ruido, furia y alboroto llegaron donde Sancho estaba, atónito y
embelesado de lo que oía y veía; y, cuando llegaron a él, uno le dijo:

-¡Ármese luego vuestra señoría, si no quiere perderse y que toda esta
ínsula se pierda!

-¿Qué me tengo de armar -respondió Sancho-, ni qué sé yo de armas ni de
socorros? Estas cosas mejor será dejarlas para mi amo don Quijote, que en
dos paletas las despachará y pondrá en cobro; que yo, pecador fui a Dios,
no se me entiende nada destas priesas.

-¡Ah, señor gobernador! -dijo otro-. ¿Qué relente es ése? Ármese vuesa
merced, que aquí le traemos armas ofensivas y defensivas, y salga a esa
plaza, y sea nuestra guía y nuestro capitán, pues de derecho le toca el
serlo, siendo nuestro gobernador.

-Ármenme norabuena -replicó Sancho.

Y al momento le trujeron dos paveses, que venían proveídos dellos, y le
pusieron encima de la camisa, sin dejarle tomar otro vestido, un pavés
delante y otro detrás, y, por unas concavidades que traían hechas, le
sacaron los brazos, y le liaron muy bien con unos cordeles, de modo que
quedó emparedado y entablado, derecho como un huso, sin poder doblar las
rodillas ni menearse un solo paso. Pusiéronle en las manos una lanza, a la
cual se arrimó para poder tenerse en pie. Cuando así le tuvieron, le
dijeron que caminase, y los guiase y animase a todos; que, siendo él su
norte, su lanterna y su lucero, tendrían buen fin sus negocios.

-¿Cómo tengo de caminar, desventurado yo -respondió Sancho-, que no puedo
jugar las choquezuelas de las rodillas, porque me lo impiden estas tablas
que tan cosidas tengo con mis carnes? Lo que han de hacer es llevarme en
brazos y ponerme, atravesado o en pie, en algún postigo, que yo le
guardaré, o con esta lanza o con mi cuerpo.

-Ande, señor gobernador -dijo otro-, que más el miedo que las tablas le
impiden el paso; acabe y menéese, que es tarde, y los enemigos crecen, y
las voces se aumentan y el peligro carga.

Por cuyas persuasiones y vituperios probó el pobre gobernador a moverse, y
fue dar consigo en el suelo tan gran golpe, que pensó que se había hecho
pedazos. Quedó como galápago encerrado y cubierto con sus conchas, o como
medio tocino metido entre dos artesas, o bien así como barca que da al
través en la arena; y no por verle caído aquella gente burladora le
tuvieron compasión alguna; antes, apagando las antorchas, tornaron a
reforzar las voces, y a reiterar el ¡arma! con tan gran priesa, pasando por
encima del pobre Sancho, dándole infinitas cuchilladas sobre los paveses,
que si él no se recogiera y encogiera, metiendo la cabeza entre los
paveses, lo pasara muy mal el pobre gobernador, el cual, en aquella
estrecheza recogido, sudaba y trasudaba, y de todo corazón se encomendaba a
Dios que de aquel peligro le sacase.

Unos tropezaban en él, otros caían, y tal hubo que se puso encima un buen
espacio, y desde allí, como desde atalaya, gobernaba los ejércitos, y a
grandes voces decía:

-¡Aquí de los nuestros, que por esta parte cargan más los enemigos! ¡Aquel
portillo se guarde, aquella puerta se cierre, aquellas escalas se tranquen!
¡Vengan alcancías, pez y resina en calderas de aceite ardiendo!
¡Trinchéense las calles con colchones!

En fin, él nombraba con todo ahínco todas las baratijas e instrumentos y
pertrechos de guerra con que suele defenderse el asalto de una ciudad, y el
molido Sancho, que lo escuchaba y sufría todo, decía entre sí:

-¡Oh, si mi Señor fuese servido que se acabase ya de perder esta ínsula, y
me viese yo o muerto o fuera desta grande angustia!

Oyó el cielo su petición, y, cuando menos lo esperaba, oyó voces que
decían:

-¡Vitoria, vitoria! ¡Los enemigos van de vencida! ¡Ea, señor gobernador,
levántese vuesa merced y venga a gozar del vencimiento y a repartir los
despojos que se han tomado a los enemigos, por el valor dese invencible
brazo!

-Levántenme -dijo con voz doliente el dolorido Sancho.

Ayudáronle a levantar, y, puesto en pie, dijo:

-El enemigo que yo hubiere vencido quiero que me le claven en la frente. Yo
no quiero repartir despojos de enemigos, sino pedir y suplicar a algún
amigo, si es que le tengo, que me dé un trago de vino, que me seco, y me
enjugue este sudor, que me hago agua.

Limpiáronle, trujéronle el vino, desliáronle los paveses, sentóse sobre su
lecho y desmayóse del temor, del sobresalto y del trabajo. Ya les pesaba a
los de la burla de habérsela hecho tan pesada; pero el haber vuelto en sí
Sancho les templó la pena que les había dado su desmayo. Preguntó qué hora
era, respondiéronle que ya amanecía. Calló, y, sin decir otra cosa, comenzó
a vestirse, todo sepultado en silencio, y todos le miraban y esperaban en
qué había de parar la priesa con que se vestía. Vistióse, en fin, y poco a
poco, porque estaba molido y no podía ir mucho a mucho, se fue a la
caballeriza, siguiéndole todos los que allí se hallaban, y, llegándose al
rucio, le abrazó y le dio un beso de paz en la frente, y, no sin lágrimas
en los ojos, le dijo:

-Venid vos acá, compañero mío y amigo mío, y conllevador de mis trabajos y
miserias: cuando yo me avenía con vos y no tenía otros pensamientos que los
que me daban los cuidados de remendar vuestros aparejos y de sustentar
vuestro corpezuelo, dichosas eran mis horas, mis días y mis años; pero,
después que os dejé y me subí sobre las torres de la ambición y de la
soberbia, se me han entrado por el alma adentro mil miserias, mil trabajos
y cuatro mil desasosiegos.

Y, en tanto que estas razones iba diciendo, iba asimesmo enalbardando el
asno, sin que nadie nada le dijese. Enalbardado, pues, el rucio, con gran
pena y pesar subió sobre él, y, encaminando sus palabras y razones al
mayordomo, al secretario, al maestresala y a Pedro Recio el doctor, y a
otros muchos que allí presentes estaban, dijo:

-Abrid camino, señores míos, y dejadme volver a mi antigua libertad;
dejadme que vaya a buscar la vida pasada, para que me resucite de esta
muerte presente. Yo no nací para ser gobernador, ni para defender ínsulas
ni ciudades de los enemigos que quisieren acometerlas. Mejor se me entiende
a mí de arar y cavar, podar y ensarmentar las viñas, que de dar leyes ni de
defender provincias ni reinos. Bien se está San Pedro en Roma: quiero
decir, que bien se está cada uno usando el oficio para que fue nacido.
Mejor me está a mí una hoz en la mano que un cetro de gobernador; más
quiero hartarme de gazpachos que estar sujeto a la miseria de un médico
impertinente que me mate de hambre; y más quiero recostarme a la sombra de
una encina en el verano y arroparme con un zamarro de dos pelos en el
invierno, en mi libertad, que acostarme con la sujeción del gobierno entre
sábanas de holanda y vestirme de martas cebollinas. Vuestras mercedes se
queden con Dios, y digan al duque mi señor que, desnudo nací, desnudo me
hallo: ni pierdo ni gano; quiero decir, que sin blanca entré en este
gobierno y sin ella salgo, bien al revés de como suelen salir los
gobernadores de otras ínsulas. Y apártense: déjenme ir, que me voy a
bizmar; que creo que tengo brumadas todas las costillas, merced a los
enemigos que esta noche se han paseado sobre mí.

-No ha de ser así, señor gobernador -dijo el doctor Recio-, que yo le daré
a vuesa merced una bebida contra caídas y molimientos, que luego le vuelva
en su prístina entereza y vigor; y, en lo de la comida, yo prometo a vuesa
merced de enmendarme, dejándole comer abundantemente de todo aquello que
quisiere.

-¡Tarde piache! -respondió Sancho-. Así dejaré de irme como volverme turco.
No son estas burlas para dos veces. Por Dios que así me quede en éste, ni
admita otro gobierno, aunque me le diesen entre dos platos, como volar al
cielo sin alas. Yo soy del linaje de los Panzas, que todos son testarudos,
y si una vez dicen nones, nones han de ser, aunque sean pares, a pesar de
todo el mundo. Quédense en esta caballeriza las alas de la hormiga, que me
levantaron en el aire para que me comiesen vencejos y otros pájaros, y
volvámonos a andar por el suelo con pie llano, que, si no le adornaren
zapatos picados de cordobán, no le faltarán alpargatas toscas de cuerda.
Cada oveja con su pareja, y nadie tienda más la pierna de cuanto fuere
larga la sábana; y déjenme pasar, que se me hace tarde.

A lo que el mayordomo dijo:

-Señor gobernador, de muy buena gana dejáramos ir a vuesa merced, puesto
que nos pesará mucho de perderle, que su ingenio y su cristiano proceder
obligan a desearle; pero ya se sabe que todo gobernador está obligado,
antes que se ausente de la parte donde ha gobernado, dar primero
residencia: déla vuesa merced de los diez días que ha que tiene el
gobierno, y váyase a la paz de Dios.

-Nadie me la puede pedir -respondió Sancho-, si no es quien ordenare el
duque mi señor; yo voy a verme con él, y a él se la daré de molde; cuanto
más que, saliendo yo desnudo, como salgo, no es menester otra señal para
dar a entender que he gobernado como un ángel.

-Par Dios que tiene razón el gran Sancho -dijo el doctor Recio-, y que soy
de parecer que le dejemos ir, porque el duque ha de gustar infinito de
verle.

Todos vinieron en ello, y le dejaron ir, ofreciéndole primero compañía y
todo aquello que quisiese para el regalo de su persona y para la comodidad
de su viaje. Sancho dijo que no quería más de un poco de cebada para el
rucio y medio queso y medio pan para él; que, pues el camino era tan corto,
no había menester mayor ni mejor repostería. Abrazáronle todos, y él,
llorando, abrazó a todos, y los dejó admirados, así de sus razones como de
su determinación tan resoluta y tan discreta.





Capítulo LIV. Que trata de cosas tocantes a esta historia, y no a otra
alguna


Resolviéronse el duque y la duquesa de que el desafío que don Quijote hizo
a su vasallo, por la causa ya referida, pasase adelante; y, puesto que el
mozo estaba en Flandes, adonde se había ido huyendo, por no tener por
suegra a doña Rodríguez, ordenaron de poner en su lugar a un lacayo gascón,
que se llamaba Tosilos, industriándole primero muy bien de todo lo que
había de hacer.

De allí a dos días dijo el duque a don Quijote como desde allí a cuatro
vendría su contrario, y se presentaría en el campo, armado como caballero,
y sustentaría como la doncella mentía por mitad de la barba, y aun por toda
la barba entera, si se afirmaba que él le hubiese dado palabra de
casamiento. Don Quijote recibió mucho gusto con las tales nuevas, y se
prometió a sí mismo de hacer maravillas en el caso, y tuvo a gran ventura
habérsele ofrecido ocasión donde aquellos señores pudiesen ver hasta dónde
se estendía el valor de su poderoso brazo; y así, con alborozo y contento,
esperaba los cuatro días, que se le iban haciendo, a la cuenta de su deseo,
cuatrocientos siglos.

Dejémoslos pasar nosotros, como dejamos pasar otras cosas, y vamos a
acompañar a Sancho, que entre alegre y triste venía caminando sobre el
rucio a buscar a su amo, cuya compañía le agradaba más que ser gobernador
de todas las ínsulas del mundo.

Sucedió, pues, que, no habiéndose alongado mucho de la ínsula del su
gobierno -que él nunca se puso a averiguar si era ínsula, ciudad, villa o
lugar la que gobernaba-, vio que por el camino por donde él iba venían seis
peregrinos con sus bordones, de estos estranjeros que piden la limosna
cantando, los cuales, en llegando a él, se pusieron en ala, y, levantando
las voces todos juntos, comenzaron a cantar en su lengua lo que Sancho no
pudo entender, si no fue una palabra que claramente pronunciaba limosna,
por donde entendió que era limosna la que en su canto pedían; y como él,
según dice Cide Hamete, era caritativo además, sacó de sus alforjas medio
pan y medio queso, de que venía proveído, y dióselo, diciéndoles por señas
que no tenía otra cosa que darles. Ellos lo recibieron de muy buena gana, y
dijeron:

-¡Guelte! ¡Guelte!

-No entiendo -respondió Sancho- qué es lo que me pedís, buena gente.

Entonces uno de ellos sacó una bolsa del seno y mostrósela a Sancho, por
donde entendió que le pedían dineros; y él, poniéndose el dedo pulgar en la
garganta y estendiendo la mano arriba, les dio a entender que no tenía
ostugo de moneda, y, picando al rucio, rompió por ellos; y, al pasar,
habiéndole estado mirando uno dellos con mucha atención, arremetió a él,
echándole los brazos por la cintura; en voz alta y muy castellana, dijo:

-¡Válame Dios! ¿Qué es lo que veo? ¿Es posible que tengo en mis brazos al
mi caro amigo, al mi buen vecino Sancho Panza? Sí tengo, sin duda, porque
yo ni duermo, ni estoy ahora borracho.

Admiróse Sancho de verse nombrar por su nombre y de verse abrazar del
estranjero peregrino, y, después de haberle estado mirando sin hablar
palabra, con mucha atención, nunca pudo conocerle; pero, viendo su
suspensión el peregrino, le dijo:

-¿Cómo, y es posible, Sancho Panza hermano, que no conoces a tu vecino
Ricote el morisco, tendero de tu lugar?

Entonces Sancho le miró con más atención y comenzó a rafigurarle, y ,
finalmente, le vino a conocer de todo punto, y, sin apearse del jumento, le
echó los brazos al cuello, y le dijo:

-¿Quién diablos te había de conocer, Ricote, en ese traje de moharracho que
traes? Dime: ¿quién te ha hecho franchote, y cómo tienes atrevimiento de
volver a España, donde si te cogen y conocen tendrás harta mala ventura?

-Si tú no me descubres, Sancho -respondió el peregrino-, seguro estoy que
en este traje no habrá nadie que me conozca; y apartémonos del camino a
aquella alameda que allí parece, donde quieren comer y reposar mis
compañeros, y allí comerás con ellos, que son muy apacible gente. Yo tendré
lugar de contarte lo que me ha sucedido después que me partí de nuestro
lugar, por obedecer el bando de Su Majestad, que con tanto rigor a los
desdichados de mi nación amenazaba, según oíste.

Hízolo así Sancho, y, hablando Ricote a los demás peregrinos, se apartaron
a la alameda que se parecía, bien desviados del camino real. Arrojaron los
bordones, quitáronse las mucetas o esclavinas y quedaron en pelota, y todos
ellos eran mozos y muy gentileshombres, excepto Ricote, que ya era hombre
entrado en años. Todos traían alforjas, y todas, según pareció, venían bien
proveídas, a lo menos, de cosas incitativas y que llaman a la sed de dos
leguas.

Tendiéronse en el suelo, y, haciendo manteles de las yerbas, pusieron sobre
ellas pan, sal, cuchillos, nueces, rajas de queso, huesos mondos de jamón,
que si no se dejaban mascar, no defendían el ser chupados. Pusieron
asimismo un manjar negro que dicen que se llama cavial, y es hecho de
huevos de pescados, gran despertador de la colambre. No faltaron aceitunas,
aunque secas y sin adobo alguno, pero sabrosas y entretenidas. Pero lo que
más campeó en el campo de aquel banquete fueron seis botas de vino, que
cada uno sacó la suya de su alforja; hasta el buen Ricote, que se había
transformado de morisco en alemán o en tudesco, sacó la suya, que en
grandeza podía competir con las cinco.

Comenzaron a comer con grandísimo gusto y muy de espacio, saboreándose con
cada bocado, que le tomaban con la punta del cuchillo, y muy poquito de
cada cosa, y luego, al punto, todos a una, levantaron los brazos y las
botas en el aire; puestas las bocas en su boca, clavados los ojos en el
cielo, no parecía sino que ponían en él la puntería; y desta manera,
meneando las cabezas a un lado y a otro, señales que acreditaban el gusto
que recebían, se estuvieron un buen espacio, trasegando en sus estómagos
las entrañas de las vasijas.

Todo lo miraba Sancho, y de ninguna cosa se dolía; antes, por cumplir con
el refrán, que él muy bien sabía, de "cuando a Roma fueres, haz como
vieres", pidió a Ricote la bota, y tomó su puntería como los demás, y no
con menos gusto que ellos.

Cuatro veces dieron lugar las botas para ser empinadas; pero la quinta no
fue posible, porque ya estaban más enjutas y secas que un esparto, cosa que
puso mustia la alegría que hasta allí habían mostrado. De cuando en cuando,
juntaba alguno su mano derecha con la de Sancho, y decía:

-Español y tudesqui, tuto uno: bon compaño.

Y Sancho respondía: Bon compaño, jura Di!

Y disparaba con una risa que le duraba un hora, sin acordarse entonces de
nada de lo que le había sucedido en su gobierno; porque sobre el rato y
tiempo cuando se come y bebe, poca jurisdición suelen tener los cuidados.
Finalmente, el acabársele el vino fue principio de un sueño que dio a
todos, quedándose dormidos sobre las mismas mesas y manteles; solos Ricote
y Sancho quedaron alerta, porque habían comido más y bebido menos; y,
apartando Ricote a Sancho, se sentaron al pie de una haya, dejando a los
peregrinos sepultados en dulce sueño; y Ricote, sin tropezar nada en su
lengua morisca, en la pura castellana le dijo las siguientes razones:

-«Bien sabes, ¡oh Sancho Panza, vecino y amigo mío!, como el pregón y bando
que Su Majestad mandó publicar contra los de mi nación puso terror y
espanto en todos nosotros; a lo menos, en mí le puso de suerte que me
parece que antes del tiempo que se nos concedía para que hiciésemos
ausencia de España, ya tenía el rigor de la pena ejecutado en mi persona y
en la de mis hijos. Ordené, pues, a mi parecer como prudente, bien así como
el que sabe que para tal tiempo le han de quitar la casa donde vive y se
provee de otra donde mudarse; ordené, digo, de salir yo solo, sin mi
familia, de mi pueblo, y ir a buscar donde llevarla con comodidad y sin la
priesa con que los demás salieron; porque bien vi, y vieron todos nuestros
ancianos, que aquellos pregones no eran sólo amenazas, como algunos decían,
sino verdaderas leyes, que se habían de poner en ejecución a su determinado
tiempo; y forzábame a creer esta verdad saber yo los ruines y disparatados
intentos que los nuestros tenían, y tales, que me parece que fue
inspiración divina la que movió a Su Majestad a poner en efecto tan
gallarda resolución, no porque todos fuésemos culpados, que algunos había
cristianos firmes y verdaderos; pero eran tan pocos que no se podían oponer
a los que no lo eran, y no era bien criar la sierpe en el seno, teniendo
los enemigos dentro de casa. Finalmente, con justa razón fuimos castigados
con la pena del destierro, blanda y suave al parecer de algunos, pero al
nuestro, la más terrible que se nos podía dar. Doquiera que estamos
lloramos por España, que, en fin, nacimos en ella y es nuestra patria
natural; en ninguna parte hallamos el acogimiento que nuestra desventura
desea, y en Berbería, y en todas las partes de África, donde esperábamos
ser recebidos, acogidos y regalados, allí es donde más nos ofenden y
maltratan. No hemos conocido el bien hasta que le hemos perdido; y es el
deseo tan grande, que casi todos tenemos de volver a España, que los más de
aquellos, y son muchos, que saben la lengua como yo, se vuelven a ella, y
dejan allá sus mujeres y sus hijos desamparados: tanto es el amor que la
tienen; y agora conozco y experimento lo que suele decirse: que es dulce el
amor de la patria. Salí, como digo, de nuestro pueblo, entré en Francia, y,
aunque allí nos hacían buen acogimiento, quise verlo todo. Pasé a Italia y
llegué a Alemania, y allí me pareció que se podía vivir con más libertad,
porque sus habitadores no miran en muchas delicadezas: cada uno vive como
quiere, porque en la mayor parte della se vive con libertad de conciencia.
Dejé tomada casa en un pueblo junto a Augusta; juntéme con estos
peregrinos, que tienen por costumbre de venir a España muchos dellos, cada
año, a visitar los santuarios della, que los tienen por sus Indias, y por
certísima granjería y conocida ganancia. Ándanla casi toda, y no hay pueblo
ninguno de donde no salgan comidos y bebidos, como suele decirse, y con un
real, por lo menos, en dineros, y al cabo de su viaje salen con más de cien
escudos de sobra que, trocados en oro, o ya en el hueco de los bordones, o
entre los remiendos de las esclavinas, o con la industria que ellos pueden,
los sacan del reino y los pasan a sus tierras, a pesar de las guardas de
los puestos y puertos donde se registran. Ahora es mi intención, Sancho,
sacar el tesoro que dejé enterrado, que por estar fuera del pueblo lo podré
hacer sin peligro y escribir o pasar desde Valencia a mi hija y a mi mujer,
que sé que está en Argel, y dar traza como traerlas a algún puerto de
Francia, y desde allí llevarlas a Alemania, donde esperaremos lo que Dios
quisiere hacer de nosotros; que, en resolución, Sancho, yo sé cierto que la
Ricota mi hija y Francisca Ricota, mi mujer, son católicas cristianas, y,
aunque yo no lo soy tanto, todavía tengo más de cristiano que de moro, y
ruego siempre a Dios me abra los ojos del entendimiento y me dé a conocer
cómo le tengo de servir. Y lo que me tiene admirado es no saber por qué se
fue mi mujer y mi hija antes a Berbería que a Francia, adonde podía vivir
como cristiana.»

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Mira, Ricote, eso no debió estar en su mano, porque las llevó Juan
Tiopieyo, el hermano de tu mujer; y, como debe de ser fino moro, fuese a lo
más bien parado, y séte decir otra cosa: que creo que vas en balde a buscar
lo que dejaste encerrado; porque tuvimos nuevas que habían quitado a tu
cuñado y tu mujer muchas perlas y mucho dinero en oro que llevaban por
registrar.

-Bien puede ser eso -replicó Ricote-, pero yo sé, Sancho, que no tocaron a
mi encierro, porque yo no les descubrí dónde estaba, temeroso de algún
desmán; y así, si tú, Sancho, quieres venir conmigo y ayudarme a sacarlo y
a encubrirlo, yo te daré docientos escudos, con que podrás remediar tus
necesidades, que ya sabes que sé yo que las tienes muchas.

-Yo lo hiciera -respondió Sancho-, pero no soy nada codicioso; que, a
serlo, un oficio dejé yo esta mañana de las manos, donde pudiera hacer las
paredes de mi casa de oro, y comer antes de seis meses en platos de plata;
y, así por esto como por parecerme haría traición a mi rey en dar favor a
sus enemigos, no fuera contigo, si como me prometes docientos escudos, me
dieras aquí de contado cuatrocientos.

-Y ¿qué oficio es el que has dejado, Sancho? -preguntó Ricote.

-He dejado de ser gobernador de una ínsula -respondió Sancho-, y tal, que a
buena fee que no hallen otra como ella a tres tirones.

-¿Y dónde está esa ínsula? -preguntó Ricote.

-¿Adónde? -respondió Sancho-. Dos leguas de aquí, y se llama la ínsula
Barataria.

-Calla, Sancho -dijo Ricote-, que las ínsulas están allá dentro de la mar;
que no hay ínsulas en la tierra firme.

-¿Cómo no? -replicó Sancho-. Dígote, Ricote amigo, que esta mañana me partí
della, y ayer estuve en ella gobernando a mi placer, como un sagitario;
pero, con todo eso, la he dejado, por parecerme oficio peligroso el de los
gobernadores.

-Y ¿qué has ganado en el gobierno? -preguntó Ricote.

-He ganado -respondió Sancho- el haber conocido que no soy bueno para
gobernar, si no es un hato de ganado, y que las riquezas que se ganan en
los tales gobiernos son a costa de perder el descanso y el sueño, y aun el
sustento; porque en las ínsulas deben de comer poco los gobernadores,
especialmente si tienen médicos que miren por su salud.

-Yo no te entiendo, Sancho -dijo Ricote-, pero paréceme que todo lo que
dices es disparate; que, ¿quién te había de dar a ti ínsulas que
gobernases? ¿Faltaban hombres en el mundo más hábiles para gobernadores que
tú eres? Calla, Sancho, y vuelve en ti, y mira si quieres venir conmigo,
como te he dicho, a ayudarme a sacar el tesoro que dejé escondido; que en
verdad que es tanto, que se puede llamar tesoro, y te daré con que vivas,
como te he dicho.

-Ya te he dicho, Ricote -replicó Sancho-, que no quiero; conténtate que por
mí no serás descubierto, y prosigue en buena hora tu camino, y déjame
seguir el mío; que yo sé que lo bien ganado se pierde, y lo malo, ello y su
dueño.

-No quiero porfiar, Sancho -dijo Ricote-, pero dime: ¿hallástete en nuestro
lugar, cuando se partió dél mi mujer, mi hija y mi cuñado?

-Sí hallé -respondió Sancho-, y séte decir que salió tu hija tan hermosa
que salieron a verla cuantos había en el pueblo, y todos decían que era la
más bella criatura del mundo. Iba llorando y abrazaba a todas sus amigas y
conocidas, y a cuantos llegaban a verla, y a todos pedía la encomendasen a
Dios y a Nuestra Señora su madre; y esto, con tanto sentimiento, que a mí
me hizo llorar, que no suelo ser muy llorón. Y a fee que muchos tuvieron
deseo de esconderla y salir a quitársela en el camino; pero el miedo de ir
contra el mandado del rey los detuvo. Principalmente se mostró más
apasionado don Pedro Gregorio, aquel mancebo mayorazgo rico que tú conoces,
que dicen que la quería mucho, y después que ella se partió, nunca más él
ha parecido en nuestro lugar, y todos pensamos que iba tras ella para
robarla; pero hasta ahora no se ha sabido nada.

-Siempre tuve yo mala sospecha -dijo Ricote- de que ese caballero adamaba a
mi hija; pero, fiado en el valor de mi Ricota, nunca me dio pesadumbre el
saber que la quería bien; que ya habrás oído decir, Sancho, que las
moriscas pocas o ninguna vez se mezclaron por amores con cristianos viejos,
y mi hija, que, a lo que yo creo, atendía a ser más cristiana que
enamorada, no se curaría de las solicitudes de ese señor mayorazgo.

-Dios lo haga -replicó Sancho-, que a entrambos les estaría mal. Y déjame
partir de aquí, Ricote amigo, que quiero llegar esta noche adonde está mi
señor don Quijote.

-Dios vaya contigo, Sancho hermano, que ya mis compañeros se rebullen, y
también es hora que prosigamos nuestro camino.

Y luego se abrazaron los dos, y Sancho subió en su rucio, y Ricote se
arrimó a su bordón, y se apartaron.





Capítulo LV. De cosas sucedidas a Sancho en el camino, y otras que no hay
más que ver


El haberse detenido Sancho con Ricote no le dio lugar a que aquel día
llegase al castillo del duque, puesto que llegó media legua dél, donde le
tomó la noche, algo escura y cerrada; pero, como era verano, no le dio
mucha pesadumbre; y así, se apartó del camino con intención de esperar la
mañana; y quiso su corta y desventurada suerte que, buscando lugar donde
mejor acomodarse, cayeron él y el rucio en una honda y escurísima sima que
entre unos edificios muy antiguos estaba, y al tiempo del caer, se
encomendó a Dios de todo corazón, pensando que no había de parar hasta el
profundo de los abismos. Y no fue así, porque a poco más de tres estados
dio fondo el rucio, y él se halló encima dél, sin haber recebido lisión ni
daño alguno.

Tentóse todo el cuerpo, y recogió el aliento, por ver si estaba sano o
agujereado por alguna parte; y, viéndose bueno, entero y católico de salud,
no se hartaba de dar gracias a Dios Nuestro Señor de la merced que le había
hecho, porque sin duda pensó que estaba hecho mil pedazos. Tentó asimismo
con las manos por las paredes de la sima, por ver si sería posible salir
della sin ayuda de nadie; pero todas las halló rasas y sin asidero alguno,
de lo que Sancho se congojó mucho, especialmente cuando oyó que el rucio se
quejaba tierna y dolorosamente; y no era mucho, ni se lamentaba de vicio,
que, a la verdad, no estaba muy bien parado.

-¡Ay -dijo entonces Sancho Panza-, y cuán no pensados sucesos suelen
suceder a cada paso a los que viven en este miserable mundo! ¿Quién dijera
que el que ayer se vio entronizado gobernador de una ínsula, mandando a sus
sirvientes y a sus vasallos, hoy se había de ver sepultado en una sima, sin
haber persona alguna que le remedie, ni criado ni vasallo que acuda a su
socorro? Aquí habremos de perecer de hambre yo y mi jumento, si ya no nos
morimos antes, él de molido y quebrantado, y yo de pesaroso. A lo menos, no
seré yo tan venturoso como lo fue mi señor don Quijote de la Mancha cuando
decendió y bajó a la cueva de aquel encantado Montesinos, donde halló quien
le regalase mejor que en su casa, que no parece sino que se fue a mesa
puesta y a cama hecha. Allí vio él visiones hermosas y apacibles, y yo veré
aquí, a lo que creo, sapos y culebras. ¡Desdichado de mí, y en qué han
parado mis locuras y fantasías! De aquí sacarán mis huesos, cuando el cielo
sea servido que me descubran, mondos, blancos y raídos, y los de mi buen
rucio con ellos, por donde quizá se echará de ver quién somos, a lo menos
de los que tuvieren noticia que nunca Sancho Panza se apartó de su asno, ni
su asno de Sancho Panza. Otra vez digo: ¡miserables de nosotros, que no ha
querido nuestra corta suerte que muriésemos en nuestra patria y entre los
nuestros, donde ya que no hallara remedio nuestra desgracia, no faltara
quien dello se doliera, y en la hora última de nuestro pasamiento nos
cerrara los ojos! ¡Oh compañero y amigo mío, qué mal pago te he dado de tus
buenos servicios! Perdóname y pide a la fortuna, en el mejor modo que
supieres, que nos saque deste miserable trabajo en que estamos puestos los
dos; que yo prometo de ponerte una corona de laurel en la cabeza, que no
parezcas sino un laureado poeta, y de darte los piensos doblados.

Desta manera se lamentaba Sancho Panza, y su jumento le escuchaba sin
responderle palabra alguna: tal era el aprieto y angustia en que el pobre
se hallaba. Finalmente, habiendo pasado toda aquella noche en miserables
quejas y lamentaciones, vino el día, con cuya claridad y resplandor vio
Sancho que era imposible de toda imposibilidad salir de aquel pozo sin ser
ayudado, y comenzó a lamentarse y dar voces, por ver si alguno le oía; pero
todas sus voces eran dadas en desierto, pues por todos aquellos contornos
no había persona que pudiese escucharle, y entonces se acabó de dar por
muerto.

Estaba el rucio boca arriba, y Sancho Panza le acomodó de modo que le puso
en pie, que apenas se podía tener; y, sacando de las alforjas, que también
habían corrido la mesma fortuna de la caída, un pedazo de pan, lo dio a su
jumento, que no le supo mal, y díjole Sancho, como si lo entendiera:

-Todos los duelos con pan son buenos.

En esto, descubrió a un lado de la sima un agujero, capaz de caber por él
una persona, si se agobiaba y encogía. Acudió a él Sancho Panza, y,
agazapándose, se entró por él y vio que por de dentro era espacioso y
largo, y púdolo ver, porque por lo que se podía llamar techo entraba un
rayo de sol que lo descubría todo. Vio también que se dilataba y alargaba
por otra concavidad espaciosa; viendo lo cual, volvió a salir adonde estaba
el jumento, y con una piedra comenzó a desmoronar la tierra del agujero, de
modo que en poco espacio hizo lugar donde con facilidad pudiese entrar el
asno, como lo hizo; y, cogiéndole del cabestro, comenzó a caminar por
aquella gruta adelante, por ver si hallaba alguna salida por otra parte. A
veces iba a escuras, y a veces sin luz, pero ninguna vez sin miedo.

-¡Válame Dios todopoderoso! -decía entre sí-. Esta que para mí es
desventura, mejor fuera para aventura de mi amo don Quijote. Él sí que
tuviera estas profundidades y mazmorras por jardines floridos y por
palacios de Galiana, y esperara salir de esta escuridad y estrecheza a
algún florido prado; pero yo, sin ventura, falto de consejo y menoscabado
de ánimo, a cada paso pienso que debajo de los pies de improviso se ha de
abrir otra sima más profunda que la otra, que acabe de tragarme. ¡Bien
vengas mal, si vienes solo!

Desta manera y con estos pensamientos le pareció que habría caminado poco
más de media legua, al cabo de la cual descubrió una confusa claridad, que
pareció ser ya de día, y que por alguna parte entraba, que daba indicio de
tener fin abierto aquel, para él, camino de la otra vida.

Aquí le deja Cide Hamete Benengeli, y vuelve a tratar de don Quijote,
que, alborozado y contento, esperaba el plazo de la batalla que había de
hacer con el robador de la honra de la hija de doña Rodríguez, a quien
pensaba enderezar el tuerto y desaguisado que malamente le tenían fecho.

Sucedió, pues, que, saliéndose una mañana a imponerse y ensayarse en lo que
había de hacer en el trance en que otro día pensaba verse, dando un repelón
o arremetida a Rocinante, llegó a poner los pies tan junto a una cueva,
que, a no tirarle fuertemente las riendas, fuera imposible no caer en ella.
En fin, le detuvo y no cayó, y, llegándose algo más cerca, sin apearse,
miró aquella hondura; y, estándola mirando, oyó grandes voces dentro; y,
escuchando atentamente, pudo percebir y entender que el que las daba decía:

-¡Ah de arriba! ¿Hay algún cristiano que me escuche, o algún caballero
caritativo que se duela de un pecador enterrado en vida, o un desdichado
desgobernado gobernador?

Parecióle a don Quijote que oía la voz de Sancho Panza, de que quedó
suspenso y asombrado, y, levantando la voz todo lo que pudo, dijo:

-¿Quién está allá bajo? ¿Quién se queja?

-¿Quién puede estar aquí, o quién se ha de quejar -respondieron-, sino el
asendereado de Sancho Panza, gobernador, por sus pecados y por su mala
andanza, de la ínsula Barataria, escudero que fue del famoso caballero don
Quijote de la Mancha?

Oyendo lo cual don Quijote, se le dobló la admiración y se le acrecentó el
pasmo, viniéndosele al pensamiento que Sancho Panza debía de ser muerto, y
que estaba allí penando su alma, y llevado desta imaginación dijo:

-Conjúrote por todo aquello que puedo conjurarte como católico cristiano,
que me digas quién eres; y si eres alma en pena, dime qué quieres que haga
por ti; que, pues es mi profesión favorecer y acorrer a los necesitados
deste mundo, también lo seré para acorrer y ayudar a los menesterosos del
otro mundo, que no pueden ayudarse por sí propios.

-Desa manera -respondieron-, vuestra merced que me habla debe de ser mi
señor don Quijote de la Mancha, y aun en el órgano de la voz no es otro,
sin duda.

-Don Quijote soy -replicó don Quijote-, el que profeso socorrer y ayudar en
sus necesidades a los vivos y a los muertos. Por eso dime quién eres, que
me tienes atónito; porque si eres mi escudero Sancho Panza, y te has
muerto, como no te hayan llevado los diablos, y, por la misericordia de
Dios, estés en el purgatorio, sufragios tiene nuestra Santa Madre la
Iglesia Católica Romana bastantes a sacarte de las penas en que estás, y
yo, que lo solicitaré con ella, por mi parte, con cuanto mi hacienda
alcanzare; por eso, acaba de declararte y dime quién eres.

-¡Voto a tal! -respondieron-, y por el nacimiento de quien vuesa merced
quisiere, juro, señor don Quijote de la Mancha, que yo soy su escudero
Sancho Panza, y que nunca me he muerto en todos los días de mi vida; sino
que, habiendo dejado mi gobierno por cosas y causas que es menester más
espacio para decirlas, anoche caí en esta sima donde yago, el rucio
conmigo, que no me dejará mentir, pues, por más señas, está aquí conmigo.

Y hay más: que no parece sino que el jumento entendió lo que Sancho dijo,
porque al momento comenzó a rebuznar, tan recio, que toda la cueva
retumbaba.

-¡Famoso testigo! -dijo don Quijote-. El rebuzno conozco como si le
pariera, y tu voz oigo, Sancho mío. Espérame; iré al castillo del duque,
que está aquí cerca, y traeré quien te saque desta sima, donde tus pecados
te deben de haber puesto.

-Vaya vuesa merced -dijo Sancho-, y vuelva presto, por un solo Dios, que ya
no lo puedo llevar el estar aquí sepultado en vida, y me estoy muriendo de
miedo.

Dejóle don Quijote, y fue al castillo a contar a los duques el suceso de
Sancho Panza, de que no poco se maravillaron, aunque bien entendieron que
debía de haber caído por la correspondencia de aquella gruta que de tiempos
inmemoriales estaba allí hecha; pero no podían pensar cómo había dejado el
gobierno sin tener ellos aviso de su venida. Finalmente, como dicen,
llevaron sogas y maromas; y, a costa de mucha gente y de mucho trabajo,
sacaron al rucio y a Sancho Panza de aquellas tinieblas a la luz del sol.
Viole un estudiante, y dijo:

-Desta manera habían de salir de sus gobiernos todos los malos
gobernadores, como sale este pecador del profundo del abismo: muerto de
hambre, descolorido, y sin blanca, a lo que yo creo.

Oyólo Sancho, y dijo:

-Ocho días o diez ha, hermano murmurador, que entré a gobernar la ínsula
que me dieron, en los cuales no me vi harto de pan siquiera un hora; en
ellos me han perseguido médicos, y enemigos me han brumado los güesos; ni
he tenido lugar de hacer cohechos, ni de cobrar derechos; y, siendo esto
así, como lo es, no merecía yo, a mi parecer, salir de esta manera; pero el
hombre pone y Dios dispone, y Dios sabe lo mejor y lo que le está bien a
cada uno; y cual el tiempo, tal el tiento; y nadie diga "desta agua no
beberé", que adonde se piensa que hay tocinos, no hay estacas; y Dios me
entiende, y basta, y no digo más, aunque pudiera.

-No te enojes, Sancho, ni recibas pesadumbre de lo que oyeres, que será
nunca acabar: ven tú con segura conciencia, y digan lo que dijeren; y es
querer atar las lenguas de los maldicientes lo mesmo que querer poner
puertas al campo. Si el gobernador sale rico de su gobierno, dicen dél que
ha sido un ladrón, y si sale pobre, que ha sido un para poco y un
mentecato.

-A buen seguro -respondió Sancho- que por esta vez antes me han de tener
por tonto que por ladrón.

En estas pláticas llegaron, rodeados de muchachos y de otra mucha gente, al
castillo, adonde en unos corredores estaban ya el duque y la duquesa
esperando a don Quijote y a Sancho, el cual no quiso subir a ver al duque
sin que primero no hubiese acomodado al rucio en la caballeriza, porque
decía que había pasado muy mala noche en la posada; y luego subió a ver a
sus señores, ante los cuales, puesto de rodillas, dijo:

-Yo, señores, porque lo quiso así vuestra grandeza, sin ningún merecimiento
mío, fui a gobernar vuestra ínsula Barataria, en la cual entré desnudo, y
desnudo me hallo: ni pierdo, ni gano. Si he gobernado bien o mal, testigos
he tenido delante, que dirán lo que quisieren. He declarado dudas,
sentenciado pleitos, siempre muerto de hambre, por haberlo querido así el
doctor Pedro Recio, natural de Tirteafuera, médico insulano y
gobernadoresco. Acometiéronnos enemigos de noche, y, habiéndonos puesto en
grande aprieto, dicen los de la ínsula que salieron libres y con vitoria
por el valor de mi brazo, que tal salud les dé Dios como ellos dicen
verdad. En resolución, en este tiempo yo he tanteado las cargas que trae
consigo, y las obligaciones, el gobernar, y he hallado por mi cuenta que no
las podrán llevar mis hombros, ni son peso de mis costillas, ni flechas de
mi aljaba; y así, antes que diese conmigo al través el gobierno, he querido
yo dar con el gobierno al través, y ayer de mañana dejé la ínsula como la
hallé: con las mismas calles, casas y tejados que tenía cuando entré en
ella. No he pedido prestado a nadie, ni metídome en granjerías; y, aunque
pensaba hacer algunas ordenanzas provechosas, no hice ninguna, temeroso que
no se habían de guardar: que es lo mesmo hacerlas que no hacerlas. Salí,
como digo, de la ínsula sin otro acompañamiento que el de mi rucio; caí en
una sima, víneme por ella adelante, hasta que, esta mañana, con la luz del
sol, vi la salida, pero no tan fácil que, a no depararme el cielo a mi
señor don Quijote, allí me quedara hasta la fin del mundo. Así que, mis
señores duque y duquesa, aquí está vuestro gobernador Sancho Panza, que ha
granjeado en solos diez días que ha tenido el gobierno a conocer que no se
le ha de dar nada por ser gobernador, no que de una ínsula, sino de todo el
mundo; y, con este presupuesto, besando a vuestras mercedes los pies,
imitando al juego de los muchachos, que dicen "Salta tú, y dámela tú", doy
un salto del gobierno, y me paso al servicio de mi señor don Quijote; que,
en fin, en él, aunque como el pan con sobresalto, hártome, a lo menos, y
para mí, como yo esté harto, eso me hace que sea de zanahorias que de
perdices.

Con esto dio fin a su larga plática Sancho, temiendo siempre don Quijote
que había de decir en ella millares de disparates; y, cuando le vio acabar
con tan pocos, dio en su corazón gracias al cielo, y el duque abrazó a
Sancho, y le dijo que le pesaba en el alma de que hubiese dejado tan presto
el gobierno; pero que él haría de suerte que se le diese en su estado otro
oficio de menos carga y de más provecho. Abrazóle la duquesa asimismo, y
mandó que le regalasen, porque daba señales de venir mal molido y peor
parado.





Capítulo LVI. De la descomunal y nunca vista batalla que pasó entre don
Quijote de la Mancha y el lacayo Tosilos, en la defensa de la hija de la
dueña doña Rodríguez


No quedaron arrepentidos los duques de la burla hecha a Sancho Panza del
gobierno que le dieron; y más, que aquel mismo día vino su mayordomo, y les
contó punto por punto, todas casi, las palabras y acciones que Sancho había
dicho y hecho en aquellos días, y finalmente les encareció el asalto de la
ínsula, y el miedo de Sancho, y su salida, de que no pequeño gusto
recibieron.

Después desto, cuenta la historia que se llegó el día de la batalla
aplazada, y, habiendo el duque una y muy muchas veces advertido a su lacayo
Tosilos cómo se había de avenir con don Quijote para vencerle sin matarle
ni herirle, ordenó que se quitasen los hierros a las lanzas, diciendo a don
Quijote que no permitía la cristiandad, de que él se preciaba, que aquella
batalla fuese con tanto riesgo y peligro de las vidas, y que se contentase
con que le daba campo franco en su tierra, puesto que iba contra el decreto
del Santo Concilio, que prohíbe los tales desafíos, y no quisiese llevar
por todo rigor aquel trance tan fuerte.

Don Quijote dijo que Su Excelencia dispusiese las cosas de aquel negocio
como más fuese servido; que él le obedecería en todo. Llegado, pues, el
temeroso día, y habiendo mandado el duque que delante de la plaza del
castillo se hiciese un espacioso cadahalso, donde estuviesen los jueces del
campo y las dueñas, madre y hija, demandantes, había acudido de todos los
lugares y aldeas circunvecinas infinita gente, a ver la novedad de aquella
batalla; que nunca otra tal no habían visto, ni oído decir en aquella
tierra los que vivían ni los que habían muerto.

El primero que entró en el campo y estacada fue el maestro de las
ceremonias, que tanteó el campo, y le paseó todo, porque en él no hubiese
algún engaño, ni cosa encubierta donde se tropezase y cayese; luego
entraron las dueñas y se sentaron en sus asientos, cubiertas con los mantos
hasta los ojos y aun hasta los pechos, con muestras de no pequeño
sentimiento. Presente don Quijote en la estacada, de allí a poco,
acompañado de muchas trompetas, asomó por una parte de la plaza, sobre un
poderoso caballo, hundiéndola toda, el grande lacayo Tosilos, calada la
visera y todo encambronado, con unas fuertes y lucientes armas. El caballo
mostraba ser frisón, ancho y de color tordillo; de cada mano y pie le
pendía una arroba de lana.

Venía el valeroso combatiente bien informado del duque su señor de cómo se
había de portar con el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha, advertido que en
ninguna manera le matase, sino que procurase huir el primer encuentro por
escusar el peligro de su muerte, que estaba cierto si de lleno en lleno le
encontrase. Paseó la plaza, y, llegando donde las dueñas estaban, se puso
algún tanto a mirar a la que por esposo le pedía. Llamó el maese de campo a
don Quijote, que ya se había presentado en la plaza, y junto con Tosilos
habló a las dueñas, preguntándoles si consentían que volviese por su
derecho don Quijote de la Mancha. Ellas dijeron que sí, y que todo lo que
en aquel caso hiciese lo daban por bien hecho, por firme y por valedero.

Ya en este tiempo estaban el duque y la duquesa puestos en una galería que
caía sobre la estacada, toda la cual estaba coronada de infinita gente, que
esperaba ver el riguroso trance nunca visto. Fue condición de los
combatientes que si don Quijote vencía, su contrario se había de casar con
la hija de doña Rodríguez; y si él fuese vencido, quedaba libre su
contendor de la palabra que se le pedía, sin dar otra satisfación alguna.

Partióles el maestro de las ceremonias el sol, y puso a los dos cada uno en
el puesto donde habían de estar. Sonaron los atambores, llenó el aire el
son de las trompetas, temblaba debajo de los pies la tierra; estaban
suspensos los corazones de la mirante turba, temiendo unos y esperando
otros el bueno o el mal suceso de aquel caso. Finalmente, don Quijote,
encomendándose de todo su corazón a Dios Nuestro Señor y a la señora
Dulcinea del Toboso, estaba aguardando que se le diese señal precisa de la
arremetida; empero, nuestro lacayo tenía diferentes pensamientos: no
pensaba él sino en lo que agora diré:

Parece ser que, cuando estuvo mirando a su enemiga, le pareció la más
hermosa mujer que había visto en toda su vida, y el niño ceguezuelo, a
quien suelen llamar de ordinario Amor por esas calles, no quiso perder la
ocasión que se le ofreció de triunfar de una alma lacayuna y ponerla en la
lista de sus trofeos; y así, llegándose a él bonitamente, sin que nadie le
viese, le envasó al pobre lacayo una flecha de dos varas por el lado
izquierdo, y le pasó el corazón de parte a parte; y púdolo hacer bien al
seguro, porque el Amor es invisible, y entra y sale por do quiere, sin que
nadie le pida cuenta de sus hechos.

Digo, pues, que, cuando dieron la señal de la arremetida, estaba nuestro
lacayo transportado, pensando en la hermosura de la que ya había hecho
señora de su libertad, y así, no atendió al son de la trompeta, como hizo
don Quijote, que, apenas la hubo oído, cuando arremetió, y, a todo el
correr que permitía Rocinante, partió contra su enemigo; y, viéndole partir
su buen escudero Sancho, dijo a grandes voces:

-¡Dios te guíe, nata y flor de los andantes caballeros! ¡Dios te dé la
vitoria, pues llevas la razón de tu parte!

Y, aunque Tosilos vio venir contra sí a don Quijote, no se movió un paso de
su puesto; antes, con grandes voces, llamó al maese de campo, el cual
venido a ver lo que quería, le dijo:

-Señor, ¿esta batalla no se hace porque yo me case, o no me case, con
aquella señora?

-Así es -le fue respondido.

-Pues yo -dijo el lacayo- soy temeroso de mi conciencia, y pondríala en
gran cargo si pasase adelante en esta batalla; y así, digo que yo me doy
por vencido y que quiero casarme luego con aquella señora.

Quedó admirado el maese de campo de las razones de Tosilos; y, como era uno
de los sabidores de la máquina de aquel caso, no le supo responder palabra.
Detúvose don Quijote en la mitad de su carrera, viendo que su enemigo no
le acometía. El duque no sabía la ocasión porque no se pasaba adelante en
la batalla, pero el maese de campo le fue a declarar lo que Tosilos decía,
de lo que quedó suspenso y colérico en estremo.

En tanto que esto pasaba, Tosilos se llegó adonde doña Rodríguez estaba, y
dijo a grandes voces:

-Yo, señora, quiero casarme con vuestra hija, y no quiero alcanzar por
pleitos ni contiendas lo que puedo alcanzar por paz y sin peligro de la
muerte.

Oyó esto el valeroso don Quijote, y dijo:

-Pues esto así es, yo quedo libre y suelto de mi promesa: cásense en hora
buena, y, pues Dios Nuestro Señor se la dio, San Pedro se la bendiga.

El duque había bajado a la plaza del castillo, y, llegándose a Tosilos, le
dijo:

-¿Es verdad, caballero, que os dais por vencido, y que, instigado de
vuestra temerosa conciencia, os queréis casar con esta doncella?

-Sí, señor -respondió Tosilos.

-Él hace muy bien -dijo a esta sazón Sancho Panza-, porque lo que has de
dar al mur, dalo al gato, y sacarte ha de cuidado.

Íbase Tosilos desenlazando la celada, y rogaba que apriesa le ayudasen,
porque le iban faltando los espíritus del aliento, y no podía verse
encerrado tanto tiempo en la estrecheza de aquel aposento. Quitáronsela
apriesa, y quedó descubierto y patente su rostro de lacayo. Viendo lo cual
doña Rodríguez y su hija, dando grandes voces, dijeron:

-¡Éste es engaño, engaño es éste! ¡A Tosilos, el lacayo del duque mi señor,
nos han puesto en lugar de mi verdadero esposo! ¡Justicia de Dios y del
Rey, de tanta malicia, por no decir bellaquería!

-No vos acuitéis, señoras -dijo don Quijote-, que ni ésta es malicia ni es
bellaquería; y si la es, y no ha sido la causa el duque, sino los malos
encantadores que me persiguen, los cuales, invidiosos de que yo alcanzase
la gloria deste vencimiento, han convertido el rostro de vuestro esposo en
el de este que decís que es lacayo del duque. Tomad mi consejo, y, a pesar
de la malicia de mis enemigos, casaos con él, que sin duda es el mismo que
vos deseáis alcanzar por esposo.

El duque, que esto oyó, estuvo por romper en risa toda su cólera, y dijo:

-Son tan extraordinarias las cosas que suceden al señor don Quijote que
estoy por creer que este mi lacayo no lo es; pero usemos deste ardid y
maña: dilatemos el casamiento quince días, si quieren, y tengamos encerrado
a este personaje que nos tiene dudosos, en los cuales podría ser que
volviese a su prístina figura; que no ha de durar tanto el rancor que los
encantadores tienen al señor don Quijote, y más, yéndoles tan poco en usar
estos embelecos y transformaciones.

-¡Oh señor! -dijo Sancho-, que ya tienen estos malandrines por uso y
costumbre de mudar las cosas, de unas en otras, que tocan a mi amo. Un
caballero que venció los días pasados, llamado el de los Espejos, le
volvieron en la figura del bachiller Sansón Carrasco, natural de nuestro
pueblo y grande amigo nuestro, y a mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso la han
vuelto en una rústica labradora; y así, imagino que este lacayo ha de morir
y vivir lacayo todos los días de su vida.

A lo que dijo la hija de Rodríguez:

-Séase quien fuere este que me pide por esposa, que yo se lo agradezco; que
más quiero ser mujer legítima de un lacayo que no amiga y burlada de un
caballero, puesto que el que a mí me burló no lo es.

En resolución, todos estos cuentos y sucesos pararon en que Tosilos se
recogiese, hasta ver en qué paraba su transformación; aclamaron todos la
vitoria por don Quijote, y los más quedaron tristes y melancólicos de ver
que no se habían hecho pedazos los tan esperados combatientes, bien así
como los mochachos quedan tristes cuando no sale el ahorcado que esperan,
porque le ha perdonado, o la parte, o la justicia. Fuese la gente,
volviéronse el duque y don Quijote al castillo, encerraron a Tosilos,
quedaron doña Rodríguez y su hija contentísimas de ver que, por una vía o
por otra, aquel caso había de parar en casamiento, y Tosilos no esperaba
menos.





Capítulo LVII. Que trata de cómo don Quijote se despidió del duque, y de lo
que le sucedió con la discreta y desenvuelta Altisidora, doncella de la
duquesa


Ya le pareció a don Quijote que era bien salir de tanta ociosidad como la
que en aquel castillo tenía; que se imaginaba ser grande la falta que su
persona hacía en dejarse estar encerrado y perezoso entre los infinitos
regalos y deleites que como a caballero andante aquellos señores le hacían,
y parecíale que había de dar cuenta estrecha al cielo de aquella ociosidad
y encerramiento; y así, pidió un día licencia a los duques para partirse.
Diéronsela, con muestras de que en gran manera les pesaba de que los
dejase. Dio la duquesa las cartas de su mujer a Sancho Panza, el cual lloró
con ellas, y dijo:

-¿Quién pensara que esperanzas tan grandes como las que en el pecho de mi
mujer Teresa Panza engendraron las nuevas de mi gobierno habían de parar en
volverme yo agora a las arrastradas aventuras de mi amo don Quijote de la
Mancha? Con todo esto, me contento de ver que mi Teresa correspondió a ser
quien es, enviando las bellotas a la duquesa; que, a no habérselas enviado,
quedando yo pesaroso, me mostrara ella desagradecida. Lo que me consuela es
que esta dádiva no se le puede dar nombre de cohecho, porque ya tenía yo el
gobierno cuando ella las envió, y está puesto en razón que los que reciben
algún beneficio, aunque sea con niñerías, se muestren agradecidos. En
efecto, yo entré desnudo en el gobierno y salgo desnudo dél; y así, podré
decir con segura conciencia, que no es poco: "Desnudo nací, desnudo me
hallo: ni pierdo ni gano".

Esto pasaba entre sí Sancho el día de la partida; y, saliendo don Quijote,
habiéndose despedido la noche antes de los duques, una mañana se presentó
armado en la plaza del castillo. Mirábanle de los corredores toda la gente
del castillo, y asimismo los duques salieron a verle. Estaba Sancho sobre
su rucio, con sus alforjas, maleta y repuesto, contentísimo, porque el
mayordomo del duque, el que fue la Trifaldi, le había dado un bolsico con
docientos escudos de oro, para suplir los menesteres del camino, y esto aún
no lo sabía don Quijote.

Estando, como queda dicho, mirándole todos, a deshora, entre las otras
dueñas y doncellas de la duquesa, que le miraban, alzó la voz la
desenvuelta y discreta Altisidora, y en son lastimero dijo:

   -Escucha, mal caballero;
   detén un poco las riendas;
   no fatigues las ijadas
   de tu mal regida bestia.
   Mira, falso, que no huyas
   de alguna serpiente fiera,
   sino de una corderilla
   que está muy lejos de oveja.
   Tú has burlado, monstruo horrendo,
   la más hermosa doncella
   que Dïana vio en sus montes,
   que Venus miró en sus selvas.
   Cruel Vireno, fugitivo Eneas,
   Barrabás te acompañe; allá te avengas.
   Tú llevas, ¡llevar impío!,
   en las garras de tus cerras
   las entrañas de una humilde,
   como enamorada, tierna.
   Llévaste tres tocadores,
   y unas ligas, de unas piernas
   que al mármol puro se igualan
   en lisas, blancas y negras.
   Llévaste dos mil suspiros,
   que, a ser de fuego, pudieran
   abrasar a dos mil Troyas,
   si dos mil Troyas hubiera.
   Cruel Vireno, fugitivo Eneas,
   Barrabás te acompañe; allá te avengas.
   De ese Sancho, tu escudero,
   las entrañas sean tan tercas
   y tan duras, que no salga
   de su encanto Dulcinea.
   De la culpa que tú tienes
   lleve la triste la pena;
   que justos por pecadores
   tal vez pagan en mi tierra.
   Tus más finas aventuras
   en desventuras se vuelvan,
   en sueños tus pasatiempos,
   en olvidos tus firmezas.
   Cruel Vireno, fugitivo Eneas,
   Barrabás te acompañe; allá te avengas.
   Seas tenido por falso
   desde Sevilla a Marchena,
   desde Granada hasta Loja,
   de Londres a Inglaterra.
   Si jugares al reinado,
   los cientos, o la primera,
   los reyes huyan de ti;
   ases ni sietes no veas.
   Si te cortares los callos,
   sangre las heridas viertan,
   y quédente los raigones
   si te sacares las muelas.
   Cruel Vireno, fugitivo Eneas,
   Barrabás te acompañe; allá te avengas.

En tanto que, de la suerte que se ha dicho, se quejaba la lastimada
Altisidora, la estuvo mirando don Quijote, y, sin responderla palabra,
volviendo el rostro a Sancho, le dijo:

-Por el siglo de tus pasados, Sancho mío, te conjuro que me digas una
verdad. Dime, ¿llevas por ventura los tres tocadores y las ligas que esta
enamorada doncella dice?

A lo que Sancho respondió:

-Los tres tocadores sí llevo; pero las ligas, como por los cerros de Úbeda.

Quedó la duquesa admirada de la desenvoltura de Altisidora, que, aunque la
tenía por atrevida, graciosa y desenvuelta, no en grado que se atreviera a
semejantes desenvolturas; y, como no estaba advertida desta burla, creció
más su admiración. El duque quiso reforzar el donaire, y dijo:

-No me parece bien, señor caballero, que, habiendo recebido en este mi
castillo el buen acogimiento que en él se os ha hecho, os hayáis atrevido a
llevaros tres tocadores, por lo menos, si por lo más las ligas de mi
doncella; indicios son de mal pecho y muestras que no corresponden a
vuestra fama. Volvedle las ligas; si no, yo os desafío a mortal batalla,
sin tener temor que malandrines encantadores me vuelvan ni muden el rostro,
como han hecho en el de Tosilos mi lacayo, el que entró con vos en batalla.

-No quiera Dios -respondió don Quijote- que yo desenvaine mi espada contra
vuestra ilustrísima persona, de quien tantas mercedes he recebido; los
tocadores volveré, porque dice Sancho que los tiene; las ligas es
imposible, porque ni yo las he recebido ni él tampoco; y si esta vuestra
doncella quisiere mirar sus escondrijos, a buen seguro que las halle. Yo,
señor duque, jamás he sido ladrón, ni lo pienso ser en toda mi vida, como
Dios no me deje de su mano. Esta doncella habla, como ella dice, como
enamorada, de lo que yo no le tengo culpa; y así, no tengo de qué pedirle
perdón ni a ella ni a Vuestra Excelencia, a quien suplico me tenga en mejor
opinión, y me dé de nuevo licencia para seguir mi camino.

-Déosle Dios tan bueno -dijo la duquesa-, señor don Quijote, que siempre
oigamos buenas nuevas de vuestras fechurías. Y andad con Dios; que,
mientras más os detenéis, más aumentáis el fuego en los pechos de las
doncellas que os miran; y a la mía yo la castigaré de modo, que de aquí
adelante no se desmande con la vista ni con las palabras.

-Una no más quiero que me escuches, ¡oh valeroso don Quijote! -dijo
entonces Altisidora-; y es que te pido perdón del latrocinio de las ligas,
porque, en Dios y en mi ánima que las tengo puestas, y he caído en el
descuido del que yendo sobre el asno, le buscaba.

-¿No lo dije yo? -dijo Sancho-. ¡Bonico soy yo para encubrir hurtos! Pues,
a quererlos hacer, de paleta me había venido la ocasión en mi gobierno.

Abajó la cabeza don Quijote y hizo reverencia a los duques y a todos los
circunstantes, y, volviendo las riendas a Rocinante, siguiéndole Sancho
sobre el rucio, se salió del castillo, enderezando su camino a Zaragoza.





Capítulo LVIII. Que trata de cómo menudearon sobre don Quijote aventuras
tantas, que no se daban vagar unas a otras


Cuando don Quijote se vio en la campaña rasa, libre y desembarazado de los
requiebros de Altisidora, le pareció que estaba en su centro, y que los
espíritus se le renovaban para proseguir de nuevo el asumpto de sus
caballerías, y, volviéndose a Sancho, le dijo:

-La libertad, Sancho, es uno de los más preciosos dones que a los hombres
dieron los cielos; con ella no pueden igualarse los tesoros que encierra la
tierra ni el mar encubre; por la libertad, así como por la honra, se puede
y debe aventurar la vida, y, por el contrario, el cautiverio es el mayor
mal que puede venir a los hombres. Digo esto, Sancho, porque bien has visto
el regalo, la abundancia que en este castillo que dejamos hemos tenido;
pues en metad de aquellos banquetes sazonados y de aquellas bebidas de
nieve, me parecía a mí que estaba metido entre las estrechezas de la
hambre, porque no lo gozaba con la libertad que lo gozara si fueran míos;
que las obligaciones de las recompensas de los beneficios y mercedes
recebidas son ataduras que no dejan campear al ánimo libre. ¡Venturoso
aquél a quien el cielo dio un pedazo de pan, sin que le quede obligación de
agradecerlo a otro que al mismo cielo!

-Con todo eso -dijo Sancho- que vuesa merced me ha dicho, no es bien que se
quede sin agradecimiento de nuestra parte docientos escudos de oro que en
una bolsilla me dio el mayordomo del duque, que como píctima y confortativo
la llevo puesta sobre el corazón, para lo que se ofreciere; que no siempre
hemos de hallar castillos donde nos regalen, que tal vez toparemos con
algunas ventas donde nos apaleen.

En estos y otros razonamientos iban los andantes, caballero y escudero,
cuando vieron, habiendo andado poco más de una legua, que encima de la
yerba de un pradillo verde, encima de sus capas, estaban comiendo hasta una
docena de hombres, vestidos de labradores. Junto a sí tenían unas como
sábanas blancas, con que cubrían alguna cosa que debajo estaba; estaban
empinadas y tendidas, y de trecho a trecho puestas. Llegó don Quijote a los
que comían, y, saludándolos primero cortésmente, les preguntó que qué era
lo que aquellos lienzos cubrían. Uno dellos le respondió:

-Señor, debajo destos lienzos están unas imágines de relieve y entabladura
que han de servir en un retablo que hacemos en nuestra aldea; llevámoslas
cubiertas, porque no se desfloren, y en hombros, porque no se quiebren.

-Si sois servidos -respondió don Quijote-, holgaría de verlas, pues
imágines que con tanto recato se llevan, sin duda deben de ser buenas.

-Y ¡cómo si lo son! -dijo otro-. Si no, dígalo lo que cuesta: que en verdad
que no hay ninguna que no esté en más de cincuenta ducados; y, porque vea
vuestra merced esta verdad, espere vuestra merced, y verla ha por vista de
ojos.

Y, levantándose, dejó de comer y fue a quitar la cubierta de la primera
imagen, que mostró ser la de San Jorge puesto a caballo, con una serpiente
enroscada a los pies y la lanza atravesada por la boca, con la fiereza que
suele pintarse. Toda la imagen parecía una ascua de oro, como suele
decirse. Viéndola don Quijote, dijo:

-Este caballero fue uno de los mejores andantes que tuvo la milicia divina:
llamóse don San Jorge, y fue además defendedor de doncellas. Veamos esta
otra.

Descubrióla el hombre, y pareció ser la de San Martín puesto a caballo, que
partía la capa con el pobre; y, apenas la hubo visto don Quijote, cuando
dijo:

-Este caballero también fue de los aventureros cristianos, y creo que fue
más liberal que valiente, como lo puedes echar de ver, Sancho, en que está
partiendo la capa con el pobre y le da la mitad; y sin duda debía de ser
entonces invierno, que, si no, él se la diera toda, según era de
caritativo.

-No debió de ser eso -dijo Sancho-, sino que se debió de atener al refrán
que dicen: que para dar y tener, seso es menester.

Rióse don Quijote y pidió que quitasen otro lienzo, debajo del cual se
descubrió la imagen del Patrón de las Españas a caballo, la espada
ensangrentada, atropellando moros y pisando cabezas; y, en viéndola, dijo
don Quijote:

-Éste sí que es caballero, y de las escuadras de Cristo; éste se llama don
San Diego Matamoros, uno de los más valientes santos y caballeros que tuvo
el mundo y tiene agora el cielo.

Luego descubrieron otro lienzo, y pareció que encubría la caída de San
Pablo del caballo abajo, con todas las circunstancias que en el retablo de
su conversión suelen pintarse. Cuando le vido tan al vivo, que dijeran que
Cristo le hablaba y Pablo respondía.

-Éste -dijo don Quijote- fue el mayor enemigo que tuvo la Iglesia de Dios
Nuestro Señor en su tiempo, y el mayor defensor suyo que tendrá jamás:
caballero andante por la vida, y santo a pie quedo por la muerte,
trabajador incansable en la viña del Señor, doctor de las gentes, a quien
sirvieron de escuelas los cielos y de catedrático y maestro que le enseñase
el mismo Jesucristo.

No había más imágines, y así, mandó don Quijote que las volviesen a cubrir,
y dijo a los que las llevaban:

-Por buen agüero he tenido, hermanos, haber visto lo que he visto, porque
estos santos y caballeros profesaron lo que yo profeso, que es el ejercicio
de las armas; sino que la diferencia que hay entre mí y ellos es que ellos
fueron santos y pelearon a lo divino, y yo soy pecador y peleo a lo humano.
Ellos conquistaron el cielo a fuerza de brazos, porque el cielo padece
fuerza, y yo hasta agora no sé lo que conquisto a fuerza de mis trabajos;
pero si mi Dulcinea del Toboso saliese de los que padece, mejorándose mi
ventura y adobándoseme el juicio, podría ser que encaminase mis pasos por
mejor camino del que llevo.

-Dios lo oiga y el pecado sea sordo -dijo Sancho a esta ocasión.

Admiráronse los hombres, así de la figura como de las razones de don
Quijote, sin entender la mitad de lo que en ellas decir quería. Acabaron de
comer, cargaron con sus imágines, y, despidiéndose de don Quijote,
siguieron su viaje.

Quedó Sancho de nuevo como si jamás hubiera conocido a su señor, admirado
de lo que sabía, pareciéndole que no debía de haber historia en el mundo ni
suceso que no lo tuviese cifrado en la uña y clavado en la memoria, y
díjole:

-En verdad, señor nuestramo, que si esto que nos ha sucedido hoy se puede
llamar aventura, ella ha sido de las más suaves y dulces que en todo el
discurso de nuestra peregrinación nos ha sucedido: della habemos salido sin
palos y sobresalto alguno, ni hemos echado mano a las espadas, ni hemos
batido la tierra con los cuerpos, ni quedamos hambrientos. Bendito sea
Dios, que tal me ha dejado ver con mis propios ojos.

-Tú dices bien, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, pero has de advertir que no
todos los tiempos son unos, ni corren de una misma suerte, y esto que el
vulgo suele llamar comúnmente agüeros, que no se fundan sobre natural razón
alguna, del que es discreto han de ser tenidos y juzgar por buenos
acontecimientos. Levántase uno destos agoreros por la mañana, sale de su
casa, encuéntrase con un fraile de la orden del bienaventurado San
Francisco, y, como si hubiera encontrado con un grifo, vuelve las espaldas
y vuélvese a su casa. Derrámasele al otro Mendoza la sal encima de la mesa,
y derrámasele a él la melancolía por el corazón, como si estuviese obligada
la naturaleza a dar señales de las venideras desgracias con cosas tan de
poco momento como las referidas. El discreto y cristiano no ha de andar en
puntillos con lo que quiere hacer el cielo. Llega Cipión a África, tropieza
en saltando en tierra, tiénenlo por mal agüero sus soldados; pero él,
abrazándose con el suelo, dijo: ''No te me podrás huir, África, porque te
tengo asida y entre mis brazos''. Así que, Sancho, el haber encontrado con
estas imágines ha sido para mí felicísimo acontecimiento.

-Yo así lo creo -respondió Sancho-, y querría que vuestra merced me dijese
qué es la causa por que dicen los españoles cuando quieren dar alguna
batalla, invocando aquel San Diego Matamoros: "¡Santiago, y cierra,
España!" ¿Está por ventura España abierta, y de modo que es menester
cerrarla, o qué ceremonia es ésta?

-Simplicísimo eres, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-; y mira que este gran
caballero de la cruz bermeja háselo dado Dios a España por patrón y amparo
suyo, especialmente en los rigurosos trances que con los moros los
españoles han tenido; y así, le invocan y llaman como a defensor suyo en
todas las batallas que acometen, y muchas veces le han visto visiblemente
en ellas, derribando, atropellando, destruyendo y matando los agarenos
escuadrones; y desta verdad te pudiera traer muchos ejemplos que en las
verdaderas historias españolas se cuentan.

Mudó Sancho plática, y dijo a su amo:

-Maravillado estoy, señor, de la desenvoltura de Altisidora, la doncella de
la duquesa: bravamente la debe de tener herida y traspasada aquel que
llaman Amor, que dicen que es un rapaz ceguezuelo que, con estar lagañoso,
o, por mejor decir, sin vista, si toma por blanco un corazón, por pequeño
que sea, le acierta y traspasa de parte a parte con sus flechas. He oído
decir también que en la vergüenza y recato de las doncellas se despuntan y
embotan las amorosas saetas, pero en esta Altisidora más parece que se
aguzan que despuntan.

-Advierte, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, que el amor ni mira respetos ni
guarda términos de razón en sus discursos, y tiene la misma condición que
la muerte: que así acomete los altos alcázares de los reyes como las
humildes chozas de los pastores, y cuando toma entera posesión de una alma,
lo primero que hace es quitarle el temor y la vergüenza; y así, sin ella
declaró Altisidora sus deseos, que engendraron en mi pecho antes confusión
que lástima.

-¡Crueldad notoria! -dijo Sancho-. ¡Desagradecimiento inaudito! Yo de mí sé
decir que me rindiera y avasallara la más mínima razón amorosa suya.
¡Hideputa, y qué corazón de mármol, qué entrañas de bronce y qué alma de
argamasa! Pero no puedo pensar qué es lo que vio esta doncella en vuestra
merced que así la rindiese y avasallase: qué gala, qué brío, qué donaire,
qué rostro, que cada cosa por sí déstas, o todas juntas, le enamoraron; que
en verdad en verdad que muchas veces me paro a mirar a vuestra merced desde
la punta del pie hasta el último cabello de la cabeza, y que veo más cosas
para espantar que para enamorar; y, habiendo yo también oído decir que la
hermosura es la primera y principal parte que enamora, no teniendo vuestra
merced ninguna, no sé yo de qué se enamoró la pobre.

-Advierte, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que hay dos maneras de
hermosura: una del alma y otra del cuerpo; la del alma campea y se muestra
en el entendimiento, en la honestidad, en el buen proceder, en la
liberalidad y en la buena crianza, y todas estas partes caben y pueden
estar en un hombre feo; y cuando se pone la mira en esta hermosura, y no en
la del cuerpo, suele nacer el amor con ímpetu y con ventajas. Yo, Sancho,
bien veo que no soy hermoso, pero también conozco que no soy disforme; y
bástale a un hombre de bien no ser monstruo para ser bien querido, como
tenga los dotes del alma que te he dicho.

En estas razones y pláticas se iban entrando por una selva que fuera del
camino estaba, y a deshora, sin pensar en ello, se halló don Quijote
enredado entre unas redes de hilo verde, que desde unos árboles a otros
estaban tendidas; y, sin poder imaginar qué pudiese ser aquello, dijo a
Sancho:

-Paréceme, Sancho, que esto destas redes debe de ser una de las más nuevas
aventuras que pueda imaginar. Que me maten si los encantadores que me
persiguen no quieren enredarme en ellas y detener mi camino, como en
venganza de la riguridad que con Altisidora he tenido. Pues mándoles yo
que, aunque estas redes, si como son hechas de hilo verde fueran de
durísimos diamantes, o más fuertes que aquélla con que el celoso dios de
los herreros enredó a Venus y a Marte, así la rompiera como si fuera de
juncos marinos o de hilachas de algodón.

Y, queriendo pasar adelante y romperlo todo, al improviso se le ofrecieron
delante, saliendo de entre unos árboles, dos hermosísimas pastoras; a lo
menos, vestidas como pastoras, sino que los pellicos y sayas eran de fino
brocado, digo, que las sayas eran riquísimos faldellines de tabí de oro.
Traían los cabellos sueltos por las espaldas, que en rubios podían competir
con los rayos del mismo sol; los cuales se coronaban con dos guirnaldas de
verde laurel y de rojo amaranto tejidas. La edad, al parecer, ni bajaba de
los quince ni pasaba de los diez y ocho.

Vista fue ésta que admiró a Sancho, suspendió a don Quijote, hizo parar al
sol en su carrera para verlas, y tuvo en maravilloso silencio a todos
cuatro. En fin, quien primero habló fue una de las dos zagalas, que dijo a
don Quijote:

-Detened, señor caballero, el paso, y no rompáis las redes, que no para
daño vuestro, sino para nuestro pasatiempo, ahí están tendidas; y, porque
sé que nos habéis de preguntar para qué se han puesto y quién somos, os lo
quiero decir en breves palabras. En una aldea que está hasta dos leguas de
aquí, donde hay mucha gente principal y muchos hidalgos y ricos, entre
muchos amigos y parientes se concertó que con sus hijos, mujeres y hijas,
vecinos, amigos y parientes, nos viniésemos a holgar a este sitio, que es
uno de los más agradables de todos estos contornos, formando entre todos
una nueva y pastoril Arcadia, vistiéndonos las doncellas de zagalas y los
mancebos de pastores. Traemos estudiadas dos églogas, una del famoso poeta
Garcilaso, y otra del excelentísimo Camoes, en su misma lengua
portuguesa, las cuales hasta agora no hemos representado. Ayer fue el
primero día que aquí llegamos; tenemos entre estos ramos plantadas algunas
tiendas, que dicen se llaman de campaña, en el margen de un abundoso arroyo
que todos estos prados fertiliza; tendimos la noche pasada estas redes de
estos árboles para engañar los simples pajarillos, que, ojeados con nuestro
ruido, vinieren a dar en ellas. Si gustáis, señor, de ser nuestro huésped,
seréis agasajado liberal y cortésmente; porque por agora en este sitio no
ha de entrar la pesadumbre ni la melancolía.

Calló y no dijo más. A lo que respondió don Quijote:

-Por cierto, hermosísima señora, que no debió de quedar más suspenso ni
admirado Anteón cuando vio al improviso bañarse en las aguas a Diana, como
yo he quedado atónito en ver vuestra belleza. Alabo el asumpto de vuestros
entretenimientos, y el de vuestros ofrecimientos agradezco; y, si os puedo
servir, con seguridad de ser obedecidas me lo podéis mandar; porque no es
ésta la profesión mía, sino de mostrarme agradecido y bienhechor con todo
género de gente, en especial con la principal que vuestras personas
representa; y, si como estas redes, que deben de ocupar algún pequeño
espacio, ocuparan toda la redondez de la tierra, buscara yo nuevos mundos
por do pasar sin romperlas; y porque deis algún crédito a esta mi
exageración, ved que os lo promete, por lo menos, don Quijote de la Mancha,
si es que ha llegado a vuestros oídos este nombre.

-¡Ay, amiga de mi alma -dijo entonces la otra zagala-, y qué ventura tan
grande nos ha sucedido! ¿Ves este señor que tenemos delante? Pues hágote
saber que es el más valiente, y el más enamorado, y el más comedido que
tiene el mundo, si no es que nos miente y nos engaña una historia que de
sus hazañas anda impresa y yo he leído. Yo apostaré que este buen hombre
que viene consigo es un tal Sancho Panza, su escudero, a cuyas gracias no
hay ningunas que se le igualen.

-Así es la verdad -dijo Sancho-: que yo soy ese gracioso y ese escudero que
vuestra merced dice, y este señor es mi amo, el mismo don Quijote de la
Mancha historiado y referido.

-¡Ay! -dijo la otra-. Supliquémosle, amiga, que se quede; que nuestros
padres y nuestros hermanos gustarán infinito dello, que también he oído yo
decir de su valor y de sus gracias lo mismo que tú me has dicho, y, sobre
todo, dicen dél que es el más firme y más leal enamorado que se sabe, y que
su dama es una tal Dulcinea del Toboso, a quien en toda España la dan la
palma de la hermosura.

-Con razón se la dan -dijo don Quijote-, si ya no lo pone en duda vuestra
sin igual belleza. No os canséis, señoras, en detenerme, porque las
precisas obligaciones de mi profesión no me dejan reposar en ningún cabo.

Llegó, en esto, adonde los cuatro estaban un hermano de una de las dos
pastoras, vestido asimismo de pastor, con la riqueza y galas que a las de
las zagalas correspondía; contáronle ellas que el que con ellas estaba era
el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha, y el otro, su escudero Sancho, de
quien tenía él ya noticia, por haber leído su historia. Ofreciósele el
gallardo pastor, pidióle que se viniese con él a sus tiendas; húbolo de
conceder don Quijote, y así lo hizo.

Llegó, en esto, el ojeo, llenáronse las redes de pajarillos diferentes que,
engañados de la color de las redes, caían en el peligro de que iban
huyendo. Juntáronse en aquel sitio más de treinta personas, todas
bizarramente de pastores y pastoras vestidas, y en un instante quedaron
enteradas de quiénes eran don Quijote y su escudero, de que no poco
contento recibieron, porque ya tenían dél noticia por su historia.
Acudieron a las tiendas, hallaron las mesas puestas, ricas, abundantes y
limpias; honraron a don Quijote dándole el primer lugar en ellas; mirábanle
todos, y admirábanse de verle.

Finalmente, alzados los manteles, con gran reposo alzó don Quijote la voz,
y dijo:

-Entre los pecados mayores que los hombres cometen, aunque algunos dicen
que es la soberbia, yo digo que es el desagradecimiento, ateniéndome a lo
que suele decirse: que de los desagradecidos está lleno el infierno. Este
pecado, en cuanto me ha sido posible, he procurado yo huir desde el
instante que tuve uso de razón; y si no puedo pagar las buenas obras que me
hacen con otras obras, pongo en su lugar los deseos de hacerlas, y cuando
éstos no bastan, las publico; porque quien dice y publica las buenas obras
que recibe, también las recompensara con otras, si pudiera; porque, por la
mayor parte, los que reciben son inferiores a los que dan; y así, es Dios
sobre todos, porque es dador sobre todos y no pueden corresponder las
dádivas del hombre a las de Dios con igualdad, por infinita distancia; y
esta estrecheza y cortedad, en cierto modo, la suple el agradecimiento. Yo,
pues, agradecido a la merced que aquí se me ha hecho, no pudiendo
corresponder a la misma medida, conteniéndome en los estrechos límites de
mi poderío, ofrezco lo que puedo y lo que tengo de mi cosecha; y así, digo
que sustentaré dos días naturales en metad de ese camino real que va a
Zaragoza, que estas señoras zagalas contrahechas que aquí están son las más
hermosas doncellas y más corteses que hay en el mundo, excetado sólo a la
sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, única señora de mis pensamientos, con paz sea
dicho de cuantos y cuantas me escuchan.

Oyendo lo cual, Sancho, que con grande atención le había estado escuchando,
dando una gran voz, dijo:

-¿Es posible que haya en el mundo personas que se atrevan a decir y a jurar
que este mi señor es loco? Digan vuestras mercedes, señores pastores: ¿hay
cura de aldea, por discreto y por estudiante que sea, que pueda decir lo
que mi amo ha dicho, ni hay caballero andante, por más fama que tenga de
valiente, que pueda ofrecer lo que mi amo aquí ha ofrecido?

Volvióse don Quijote a Sancho, y, encendido el rostro y colérico, le dijo:

-¿Es posible, ¡oh Sancho!, que haya en todo el orbe alguna persona que diga
que no eres tonto, aforrado de lo mismo, con no sé qué ribetes de malicioso
y de bellaco? ¿Quién te mete a ti en mis cosas, y en averiguar si soy
discreto o majadero? Calla y no me repliques, sino ensilla, si está
desensillado Rocinante: vamos a poner en efecto mi ofrecimiento, que, con
la razón que va de mi parte, puedes dar por vencidos a todos cuantos
quisieren contradecirla.

Y, con gran furia y muestras de enojo, se levantó de la silla, dejando
admirados a los circunstantes, haciéndoles dudar si le podían tener por
loco o por cuerdo. Finalmente, habiéndole persuadido que no se pusiese en
tal demanda, que ellos daban por bien conocida su agradecida voluntad y que
no eran menester nuevas demostraciones para conocer su ánimo valeroso, pues
bastaban las que en la historia de sus hechos se referían, con todo esto,
salió don Quijote con su intención; y, puesto sobre Rocinante, embrazando
su escudo y tomando su lanza, se puso en la mitad de un real camino que no
lejos del verde prado estaba. Siguióle Sancho sobre su rucio, con toda la
gente del pastoral rebaño, deseosos de ver en qué paraba su arrogante y
nunca visto ofrecimiento.

Puesto, pues, don Quijote en mitad del camino -como os he dicho-, hirió el
aire con semejantes palabras:

-¡Oh vosotros, pasajeros y viandantes, caballeros, escuderos, gente de a
pie y de a caballo que por este camino pasáis, o habéis de pasar en estos
dos días siguientes! Sabed que don Quijote de la Mancha, caballero andante,
está aquí puesto para defender que a todas las hermosuras y cortesías del
mundo exceden las que se encierran en las ninfas habitadoras destos prados
y bosques, dejando a un lado a la señora de mi alma Dulcinea del Toboso.
Por eso, el que fuere de parecer contrario, acuda, que aquí le espero.

Dos veces repitió estas mismas razones, y dos veces no fueron oídas de
ningún aventurero; pero la suerte, que sus cosas iba encaminando de mejor
en mejor, ordenó que de allí a poco se descubriese por el camino
muchedumbre de hombres de a caballo, y muchos dellos con lanzas en las
manos, caminando todos apiñados, de tropel y a gran priesa. No los hubieron
bien visto los que con don Quijote estaban, cuando, volviendo las espaldas,
se apartaron bien lejos del camino, porque conocieron que si esperaban les
podía suceder algún peligro; sólo don Quijote, con intrépido corazón, se
estuvo quedo, y Sancho Panza se escudó con las ancas de Rocinante.

Llegó el tropel de los lanceros, y uno dellos, que venía más delante, a
grandes voces comenzó a decir a don Quijote:

-¡Apártate, hombre del diablo, del camino, que te harán pedazos estos
toros!

-¡Ea, canalla -respondió don Quijote-, para mí no hay toros que valgan,
aunque sean de los más bravos que cría Jarama en sus riberas! Confesad,
malandrines, así a carga cerrada, que es verdad lo que yo aquí he
publicado; si no, conmigo sois en batalla.

No tuvo lugar de responder el vaquero, ni don Quijote le tuvo de desviarse,
aunque quisiera; y así, el tropel de los toros bravos y el de los mansos
cabestros, con la multitud de los vaqueros y otras gentes que a encerrar
los llevaban a un lugar donde otro día habían de correrse, pasaron sobre
don Quijote, y sobre Sancho, Rocinante y el rucio, dando con todos ellos en
tierra, echándole a rodar por el suelo. Quedó molido Sancho, espantado don
Quijote, aporreado el rucio y no muy católico Rocinante; pero, en fin, se
levantaron todos, y don Quijote, a gran priesa, tropezando aquí y cayendo
allí, comenzó a correr tras la vacada, diciendo a voces:

-¡Deteneos y esperad, canalla malandrina, que un solo caballero os espera,
el cual no tiene condición ni es de parecer de los que dicen que al enemigo
que huye, hacerle la puente de plata!

Pero no por eso se detuvieron los apresurados corredores, ni hicieron más
caso de sus amenazas que de las nubes de antaño. Detúvole el cansancio a
don Quijote, y, más enojado que vengado, se sentó en el camino, esperando a
que Sancho, Rocinante y el rucio llegasen. Llegaron, volvieron a subir amo
y mozo, y, sin volver a despedirse de la Arcadia fingida o contrahecha, y
con más vergüenza que gusto, siguieron su camino.





Capítulo LIX. Donde se cuenta del extraordinario suceso, que se puede
tener por aventura, que le sucedió a don Quijote


Al polvo y al cansancio que don Quijote y Sancho sacaron del
descomedimiento de los toros, socorrió una fuente clara y limpia que entre
una fresca arboleda hallaron, en el margen de la cual, dejando libres, sin
jáquima y freno, al rucio y a Rocinante, los dos asendereados amo y mozo se
sentaron. Acudió Sancho a la repostería de su alforjas, y dellas sacó de lo
que él solía llamar condumio; enjuagóse la boca, lavóse don Quijote el
rostro, con cuyo refrigerio cobraron aliento los espíritus desalentados. No
comía don Quijote, de puro pesaroso, ni Sancho no osaba tocar a los
manjares que delante tenía, de puro comedido, y esperaba a que su señor
hiciese la salva; pero, viendo que, llevado de sus imaginaciones, no se
acordaba de llevar el pan a la boca, no abrió la suya, y, atropellando por
todo género de crianza, comenzó a embaular en el estómago el pan y queso
que se le ofrecía.

-Come, Sancho amigo -dijo don Quijote-, sustenta la vida, que más que a mí
te importa, y déjame morir a mí a manos de mis pensamientos y a fuerzas de
mis desgracias. Yo, Sancho, nací para vivir muriendo, y tú para morir
comiendo; y, porque veas que te digo verdad en esto, considérame impreso en
historias, famoso en las armas, comedido en mis acciones, respetado de
príncipes, solicitado de doncellas; al cabo al cabo, cuando esperaba
palmas, triunfos y coronas, granjeadas y merecidas por mis valerosas
hazañas, me he visto esta mañana pisado y acoceado y molido de los pies de
animales inmundos y soeces. Esta consideración me embota los dientes,
entorpece las muelas, y entomece las manos, y quita de todo en todo la
gana del comer, de manera que pienso dejarme morir de hambre: muerte la más
cruel de las muertes.

-Desa manera -dijo Sancho, sin dejar de mascar apriesa- no aprobará vuestra
merced aquel refrán que dicen: "muera Marta, y muera harta". Yo, a lo
menos, no pienso matarme a mí mismo; antes pienso hacer como el zapatero,
que tira el cuero con los dientes hasta que le hace llegar donde él quiere;
yo tiraré mi vida comiendo hasta que llegue al fin que le tiene determinado
el cielo; y sepa, señor, que no hay mayor locura que la que toca en querer
desesperarse como vuestra merced, y créame, y después de comido, échese a
dormir un poco sobre los colchones verdes destas yerbas, y verá como cuando
despierte se halla algo más aliviado.

Hízolo así don Quijote, pareciéndole que las razones de Sancho más eran de
filósofo que de mentecato, y díjole:

-Si tú, ¡oh Sancho!, quisieses hacer por mí lo que yo ahora te diré, serían
mis alivios más ciertos y mis pesadumbres no tan grandes; y es que,
mientras yo duermo, obedeciendo tus consejos, tú te desviases un poco lejos
de aquí, y con las riendas de Rocinante, echando al aire tus carnes, te
dieses trecientos o cuatrocientos azotes a buena cuenta de los tres mil y
tantos que te has de dar por el desencanto de Dulcinea; que es lástima no
pequeña que aquella pobre señora esté encantada por tu descuido y
negligencia.

-Hay mucho que decir en eso -dijo Sancho-. Durmamos, por ahora, entrambos,
y después, Dios dijo lo que será. Sepa vuestra merced que esto de azotarse
un hombre a sangre fría es cosa recia, y más si caen los azotes sobre un
cuerpo mal sustentado y peor comido: tenga paciencia mi señora Dulcinea,
que, cuando menos se cate, me verá hecho una criba, de azotes; y hasta la
muerte, todo es vida; quiero decir que aún yo la tengo, junto con el deseo
de cumplir con lo que he prometido.

Agradeciéndoselo don Quijote, comió algo, y Sancho mucho, y echáronse a
dormir entrambos, dejando a su albedrío y sin orden alguna pacer del
abundosa yerba de que aquel prado estaba lleno a los dos continuos
compañeros y amigos Rocinante y el rucio. Despertaron algo tarde, volvieron
a subir y a seguir su camino, dándose priesa para llegar a una venta que,
al parecer, una legua de allí se descubría. Digo que era venta porque don
Quijote la llamó así, fuera del uso que tenía de llamar a todas las ventas
castillos.

Llegaron, pues, a ella; preguntaron al huésped si había posada. Fueles
respondido que sí, con toda la comodidad y regalo que pudiera hallar en
Zaragoza. Apeáronse y recogió Sancho su repostería en un aposento, de quien
el huésped le dio la llave; llevó las bestias a la caballeriza, echóles sus
piensos, salió a ver lo que don Quijote, que estaba sentado sobre un poyo,
le mandaba, dando particulares gracias al cielo de que a su amo no le
hubiese parecido castillo aquella venta.

Llegóse la hora del cenar; recogiéronse a su estancia; preguntó Sancho al
huésped que qué tenía para darles de cenar. A lo que el huésped respondió
que su boca sería medida; y así, que pidiese lo que quisiese: que de las
pajaricas del aire, de las aves de la tierra y de los pescados del mar
estaba proveída aquella venta.

-No es menester tanto -respondió Sancho-, que con un par de pollos que nos
asen tendremos lo suficiente, porque mi señor es delicado y come poco, y yo
no soy tragantón en demasía.

Respondióle el huésped que no tenía pollos, porque los milanos los tenían
asolados.

-Pues mande el señor huésped -dijo Sancho- asar una polla que sea tierna.

-¿Polla? ¡Mi padre! -respondió el huésped-. En verdad en verdad que envié
ayer a la ciudad a vender más de cincuenta; pero, fuera de pollas, pida
vuestra merced lo que quisiere.

-Desa manera -dijo Sancho-, no faltará ternera o cabrito.

-En casa, por ahora -respondió el huésped-, no lo hay, porque se ha
acabado; pero la semana que viene lo habrá de sobra.

-¡Medrados estamos con eso! -respondió Sancho-. Yo pondré que se vienen a
resumirse todas estas faltas en las sobras que debe de haber de tocino y
huevos.

-¡Por Dios -respondió el huésped-, que es gentil relente el que mi huésped
tiene!, pues hele dicho que ni tengo pollas ni gallinas, y ¿quiere que
tenga huevos? Discurra, si quisiere, por otras delicadezas, y déjese de
pedir gallinas.

-Resolvámonos, cuerpo de mí -dijo Sancho-, y dígame finalmente lo que
tiene, y déjese de discurrimientos, señor huésped.

Dijo el ventero:

-Lo que real y verdaderamente tengo son dos uñas de vaca que parecen manos
de ternera, o dos manos de ternera que parecen uñas de vaca; están cocidas
con sus garbanzos, cebollas y tocino, y la hora de ahora están diciendo:
''¡Coméme! ¡Coméme!''

-Por mías las marco desde aquí -dijo Sancho-; y nadie las toque, que yo las
pagaré mejor que otro, porque para mí ninguna otra cosa pudiera esperar de
más gusto, y no se me daría nada que fuesen manos, como fuesen uñas.

-Nadie las tocará -dijo el ventero-, porque otros huéspedes que tengo, de
puro principales, traen consigo cocinero, despensero y repostería.

-Si por principales va -dijo Sancho-, ninguno más que mi amo; pero el
oficio que él trae no permite despensas ni botillerías: ahí nos tendemos en
mitad de un prado y nos hartamos de bellotas o de nísperos.

Esta fue la plática que Sancho tuvo con el ventero, sin querer Sancho pasar
adelante en responderle; que ya le había preguntado qué oficio o qué
ejercicio era el de su amo.

Llegóse, pues, la hora del cenar, recogióse a su estancia don Quijote,
trujo el huésped la olla, así como estaba, y sentóse a cenar muy de
propósito. Parece ser que en otro aposento que junto al de don Quijote
estaba, que no le dividía más que un sutil tabique, oyó decir don Quijote:

-Por vida de vuestra merced, señor don Jerónimo, que en tanto que trae la
cena leamos otro capítulo de la segunda parte de Don Quijote de la Mancha.

Apenas oyó su nombre don Quijote, cuando se puso en pie, y con oído alerto
escuchó lo que dél trataban, y oyó que el tal don Jerónimo referido
respondió:

-¿Para qué quiere vuestra merced, señor don Juan, que leamos estos
disparates? Y el que hubiere leído la primera parte de la historia de don
Quijote de la Mancha no es posible que pueda tener gusto en leer esta
segunda.

-Con todo eso -dijo el don Juan-, será bien leerla, pues no hay libro tan
malo que no tenga alguna cosa buena. Lo que a mí en éste más desplace es
que pinta a don Quijote ya desenamorado de Dulcinea del Toboso.

Oyendo lo cual don Quijote, lleno de ira y de despecho, alzó la voz y dijo:

-Quienquiera que dijere que don Quijote de la Mancha ha olvidado, ni puede
olvidar, a Dulcinea del Toboso, yo le haré entender con armas iguales que
va muy lejos de la verdad; porque la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso ni puede
ser olvidada, ni en don Quijote puede caber olvido: su blasón es la
firmeza, y su profesión, el guardarla con suavidad y sin hacerse fuerza
alguna.

-¿Quién es el que nos responde? -respondieron del otro aposento.

-¿Quién ha de ser -respondió Sancho- sino el mismo don Quijote de la
Mancha, que hará bueno cuanto ha dicho, y aun cuanto dijere?; que al buen
pagador no le duelen prendas.

Apenas hubo dicho esto Sancho, cuando entraron por la puerta de su aposento
dos caballeros, que tales lo parecían, y uno dellos echando los brazos al
cuello de don Quijote, le dijo:

-Ni vuestra presencia puede desmentir vuestro nombre, ni vuestro nombre
puede no acreditar vuestra presencia: sin duda, vos, señor, sois el
verdadero don Quijote de la Mancha, norte y lucero de la andante
caballería, a despecho y pesar del que ha querido usurpar vuestro nombre y
aniquilar vuestras hazañas, como lo ha hecho el autor deste libro que aquí
os entrego.

Y, poniéndole un libro en las manos, que traía su compañero, le tomó don
Quijote, y, sin responder palabra, comenzó a hojearle, y de allí a un poco
se le volvió, diciendo:

-En esto poco que he visto he hallado tres cosas en este autor dignas de
reprehensión. La primera es algunas palabras que he leído en el prólogo; la
otra, que el lenguaje es aragonés, porque tal vez escribe sin artículos, y
la tercera, que más le confirma por ignorante, es que yerra y se desvía de
la verdad en lo más principal de la historia; porque aquí dice que la mujer
de Sancho Panza mi escudero se llama Mari Gutiérrez, y no llama tal, sino
Teresa Panza; y quien en esta parte tan principal yerra, bien se podrá
temer que yerra en todas las demás de la historia.

A esto dijo Sancho:

-¡Donosa cosa de historiador! ¡Por cierto, bien debe de estar en el cuento
de nuestros sucesos, pues llama a Teresa Panza, mi mujer, Mari Gutiérrez!
Torne a tomar el libro, señor, y mire si ando yo por ahí y si me ha mudado
el nombre.

-Por lo que he oído hablar, amigo -dijo don Jerónimo-, sin duda debéis de
ser Sancho Panza, el escudero del señor don Quijote.

-Sí soy -respondió Sancho-, y me precio dello.

-Pues a fe -dijo el caballero- que no os trata este autor moderno con la
limpieza que en vuestra persona se muestra: píntaos comedor, y simple, y no
nada gracioso, y muy otro del Sancho que en la primera parte de la historia
de vuestro amo se describe.

-Dios se lo perdone -dijo Sancho-. Dejárame en mi rincón, sin acordarse de
mí, porque quien las sabe las tañe, y bien se está San Pedro en Roma.

Los dos caballeros pidieron a don Quijote se pasase a su estancia a cenar
con ellos, que bien sabían que en aquella venta no había cosas
pertenecientes para su persona. Don Quijote, que siempre fue comedido,
condecenció con su demanda y cenó con ellos; quedóse Sancho con la olla con
mero mixto imperio; sentóse en cabecera de mesa, y con él el ventero, que
no menos que Sancho estaba de sus manos y de sus uñas aficionado.

En el discurso de la cena preguntó don Juan a don Quijote qué nuevas tenía
de la señora Dulcinea del Toboso: si se había casado, si estaba parida o
preñada, o si, estando en su entereza, se acordaba -guardando su honestidad
y buen decoro- de los amorosos pensamientos del señor don Quijote. A lo que
él respondió:

-Dulcinea se está entera, y mis pensamientos, más firmes que nunca; las
correspondencias, en su sequedad antigua; su hermosura, en la de una soez
labradora transformada.

Y luego les fue contando punto por punto el encanto de la señora Dulcinea,
y lo que le había sucedido en la cueva de Montesinos, con la orden que el
sabio Merlín le había dado para desencantarla, que fue la de los azotes de
Sancho.

Sumo fue el contento que los dos caballeros recibieron de oír contar a don
Quijote los estraños sucesos de su historia, y así quedaron admirados de
sus disparates como del elegante modo con que los contaba. Aquí le tenían
por discreto, y allí se les deslizaba por mentecato, sin saber determinarse
qué grado le darían entre la discreción y la locura.

Acabó de cenar Sancho, y, dejando hecho equis al ventero, se pasó a la
estancia de su amo; y, en entrando, dijo:

-Que me maten, señores, si el autor deste libro que vuesas mercedes tienen
quiere que no comamos buenas migas juntos; yo querría que, ya que me llama
comilón, como vuesas mercedes dicen, no me llamase también borracho.

-Sí llama -dijo don Jerónimo-, pero no me acuerdo en qué manera, aunque sé
que son malsonantes las razones, y además, mentirosas, según yo echo de ver
en la fisonomía del buen Sancho que está presente.

-Créanme vuesas mercedes -dijo Sancho- que el Sancho y el don Quijote desa
historia deben de ser otros que los que andan en aquella que compuso Cide
Hamete Benengeli, que somos nosotros: mi amo, valiente, discreto y
enamorado; y yo, simple gracioso, y no comedor ni borracho.

-Yo así lo creo -dijo don Juan-; y si fuera posible, se había de mandar que
ninguno fuera osado a tratar de las cosas del gran don Quijote, si no fuese
Cide Hamete, su primer autor, bien así como mandó Alejandro que ninguno
fuese osado a retratarle sino Apeles.

-Retráteme el que quisiere -dijo don Quijote-, pero no me maltrate; que
muchas veces suele caerse la paciencia cuando la cargan de injurias.

-Ninguna -dijo don Juan- se le puede hacer al señor don Quijote de quien él
no se pueda vengar, si no la repara en el escudo de su paciencia, que, a mi
parecer, es fuerte y grande.

En estas y otras pláticas se pasó gran parte de la noche; y, aunque don
Juan quisiera que don Quijote leyera más del libro, por ver lo que
discantaba, no lo pudieron acabar con él, diciendo que él lo daba por leído
y lo confirmaba por todo necio, y que no quería, si acaso llegase a noticia
de su autor que le había tenido en sus manos, se alegrase con pensar que le
había leído; pues de las cosas obscenas y torpes, los pensamientos se han
de apartar, cuanto más los ojos. Preguntáronle que adónde llevaba
determinado su viaje. Respondió que a Zaragoza, a hallarse en las justas
del arnés, que en aquella ciudad suelen hacerse todos los años. Díjole
don Juan que aquella nueva historia contaba como don Quijote, sea quien
se quisiere, se había hallado en ella en una sortija, falta de invención,
pobre de letras, pobrísima de libreas, aunque rica de simplicidades.

-Por el mismo caso -respondió don Quijote-, no pondré los pies en Zaragoza,
y así sacaré a la plaza del mundo la mentira dese historiador moderno, y
echarán de ver las gentes como yo no soy el don Quijote que él dice.

-Hará muy bien -dijo don Jerónimo-; y otras justas hay en Barcelona, donde
podrá el señor don Quijote mostrar su valor.

-Así lo pienso hacer -dijo don Quijote-; y vuesas mercedes me den licencia,
pues ya es hora para irme al lecho, y me tengan y pongan en el número de
sus mayores amigos y servidores.

-Y a mí también -dijo Sancho-: quizá seré bueno para algo.

Con esto se despidieron, y don Quijote y Sancho se retiraron a su aposento,
dejando a don Juan y a don Jerónimo admirados de ver la mezcla que había
hecho de su discreción y de su locura; y verdaderamente creyeron que éstos
eran los verdaderos don Quijote y Sancho, y no los que describía su autor
aragonés.

Madrugó don Quijote, y, dando golpes al tabique del otro aposento, se
despidió de sus huéspedes. Pagó Sancho al ventero magníficamente, y
aconsejóle que alabase menos la provisión de su venta, o la tuviese más
proveída.





Capítulo LX. De lo que sucedió a don Quijote yendo a Barcelona


Era fresca la mañana, y daba muestras de serlo asimesmo el día en que don
Quijote salió de la venta, informándose primero cuál era el más derecho
camino para ir a Barcelona sin tocar en Zaragoza: tal era el deseo que
tenía de sacar mentiroso aquel nuevo historiador que tanto decían que le
vituperaba.

Sucedió, pues, que en más de seis días no le sucedió cosa digna de ponerse
en escritura, al cabo de los cuales, yendo fuera de camino, le tomó la
noche entre unas espesas encinas o alcornoques; que en esto no guarda la
puntualidad Cide Hamete que en otras cosas suele.

Apeáronse de sus bestias amo y mozo, y, acomodándose a los troncos de los
árboles, Sancho, que había merendado aquel día, se dejó entrar de rondón
por las puertas del sueño; pero don Quijote, a quien desvelaban sus
imaginaciones mucho más que la hambre, no podía pegar sus ojos; antes iba y
venía con el pensamiento por mil géneros de lugares. Ya le parecía hallarse
en la cueva de Montesinos; ya ver brincar y subir sobre su pollina a la
convertida en labradora Dulcinea; ya que le sonaban en los oídos las
palabras del sabio Merlín que le referían las condiciones y diligencias que
se habían de hacer y tener en el desencanto de Dulcinea. Desesperábase de
ver la flojedad y caridad poca de Sancho su escudero, pues, a lo que creía,
solos cinco azotes se había dado, número desigual y pequeño para los
infinitos que le faltaban; y desto recibió tanta pesadumbre y enojo, que
hizo este discurso:

-Si nudo gordiano cortó el Magno Alejandro, diciendo: ''Tanto monta cortar
como desatar'', y no por eso dejó de ser universal señor de toda la Asia,
ni más ni menos podría suceder ahora en el desencanto de Dulcinea, si yo
azotase a Sancho a pesar suyo; que si la condición deste remedio está en
que Sancho reciba los tres mil y tantos azotes, ¿qué se me da a mí que se
los dé él, o que se los dé otro, pues la sustancia está en que él los
reciba, lleguen por do llegaren?

Con esta imaginación se llegó a Sancho, habiendo primero tomado las riendas
de Rocinante, y acomodádolas en modo que pudiese azotarle con ellas,
comenzóle a quitar las cintas, que es opinión que no tenía más que la
delantera, en que se sustentaban los greguescos; pero, apenas hubo llegado,
cuando Sancho despertó en todo su acuerdo, y dijo:

-¿Qué es esto? ¿Quién me toca y desencinta?

-Yo soy -respondió don Quijote-, que vengo a suplir tus faltas y a remediar
mis trabajos: véngote a azotar, Sancho, y a descargar, en parte, la deuda a
que te obligaste. Dulcinea perece; tú vives en descuido; yo muero deseando;
y así, desatácate por tu voluntad, que la mía es de darte en esta soledad,
por lo menos, dos mil azotes.

-Eso no -dijo Sancho-; vuesa merced se esté quedo; si no, por Dios
verdadero que nos han de oír los sordos. Los azotes a que yo me obligué han
de ser voluntarios, y no por fuerza, y ahora no tengo gana de azotarme;
basta que doy a vuesa merced mi palabra de vapularme y mosquearme cuando en
voluntad me viniere.

-No hay dejarlo a tu cortesía, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, porque eres duro
de corazón, y, aunque villano, blando de carnes.

Y así, procuraba y pugnaba por desenlazarle. Viendo lo cual Sancho Panza,
se puso en pie, y, arremetiendo a su amo, se abrazó con él a brazo partido,
y, echándole una zancadilla, dio con él en el suelo boca arriba; púsole
la rodilla derecha sobre el pecho, y con las manos le tenía las manos, de
modo que ni le dejaba rodear ni alentar. Don Quijote le decía:

-¿Cómo, traidor? ¿Contra tu amo y señor natural te desmandas? ¿Con quien te
da su pan te atreves?

-Ni quito rey, ni pongo rey -respondió Sancho-, sino ayúdome a mí, que soy
mi señor. Vuesa merced me prometa que se estará quedo, y no tratará de
azotarme por agora, que yo le dejaré libre y desembarazado; donde no,

Aquí morirás, traidor,

enemigo de doña Sancha.

Prometióselo don Quijote, y juró por vida de sus pensamientos no tocarle en
el pelo de la ropa, y que dejaría en toda su voluntad y albedrío el
azotarse cuando quisiese.

Levantóse Sancho, y desvióse de aquel lugar un buen espacio; y, yendo a
arrimarse a otro árbol, sintió que le tocaban en la cabeza, y, alzando las
manos, topó con dos pies de persona, con zapatos y calzas. Tembló de miedo;
acudió a otro árbol, y sucedióle lo mesmo. Dio voces llamando a don Quijote
que le favoreciese. Hízolo así don Quijote, y, preguntándole qué le había
sucedido y de qué tenía miedo, le respondió Sancho que todos aquellos
árboles estaban llenos de pies y de piernas humanas. Tentólos don Quijote,
y cayó luego en la cuenta de lo que podía ser, y díjole a Sancho:

-No tienes de qué tener miedo, porque estos pies y piernas que tientas y no
vees, sin duda son de algunos forajidos y bandoleros que en estos árboles
están ahorcados; que por aquí los suele ahorcar la justicia cuando los
coge, de veinte en veinte y de treinta en treinta; por donde me doy a
entender que debo de estar cerca de Barcelona.

Y así era la verdad como él lo había imaginado.

Al parecer alzaron los ojos, y vieron los racimos de aquellos árboles, que
eran cuerpos de bandoleros. Ya, en esto, amanecía, y si los muertos los
habían espantado, no menos los atribularon más de cuarenta bandoleros vivos
que de improviso les rodearon, diciéndoles en lengua catalana que
estuviesen quedos, y se detuviesen, hasta que llegase su capitán.

Hallóse don Quijote a pie, su caballo sin freno, su lanza arrimada a un
árbol, y, finalmente, sin defensa alguna; y así, tuvo por bien de cruzar
las manos e inclinar la cabeza, guardándose para mejor sazón y coyuntura.

Acudieron los bandoleros a espulgar al rucio, y a no dejarle ninguna cosa
de cuantas en las alforjas y la maleta traía; y avínole bien a Sancho que
en una ventrera que tenía ceñida venían los escudos del duque y los que
habían sacado de su tierra, y, con todo eso, aquella buena gente le
escardara y le mirara hasta lo que entre el cuero y la carne tuviera
escondido, si no llegara en aquella sazón su capitán, el cual mostró ser de
hasta edad de treinta y cuatro años, robusto, más que de mediana
proporción, de mirar grave y color morena. Venía sobre un poderoso caballo,
vestida la acerada cota, y con cuatro pistoletes -que en aquella tierra se
llaman pedreñales- a los lados. Vio que sus escuderos, que así llaman a los
que andan en aquel ejercicio, iban a despojar a Sancho Panza; mandóles que
no lo hiciesen, y fue luego obedecido; y así se escapó la ventrera.
Admiróle ver lanza arrimada al árbol, escudo en el suelo, y a don Quijote
armado y pensativo, con la más triste y melancólica figura que pudiera
formar la misma tristeza. Llegóse a él diciéndole:

-No estéis tan triste, buen hombre, porque no habéis caído en las manos de
algún cruel Osiris, sino en las de Roque Guinart, que tienen más de
compasivas que de rigurosas.

-No es mi tristeza -respondió don Quijote- haber caído en tu poder, ¡oh
valeroso Roque, cuya fama no hay límites en la tierra que la encierren!,
sino por haber sido tal mi descuido, que me hayan cogido tus soldados sin
el freno, estando yo obligado, según la orden de la andante caballería, que
profeso, a vivir contino alerta, siendo a todas horas centinela de mí
mismo; porque te hago saber, ¡oh gran Roque!, que si me hallaran sobre mi
caballo, con mi lanza y con mi escudo, no les fuera muy fácil rendirme,
porque yo soy don Quijote de la Mancha, aquel que de sus hazañas tiene
lleno todo el orbe.

Luego Roque Guinart conoció que la enfermedad de don Quijote tocaba más en
locura que en valentía, y, aunque algunas veces le había oído nombrar,
nunca tuvo por verdad sus hechos, ni se pudo persuadir a que semejante
humor reinase en corazón de hombre; y holgóse en estremo de haberle
encontrado, para tocar de cerca lo que de lejos dél había oído; y así, le
dijo:

-Valeroso caballero, no os despechéis ni tengáis a siniestra fortuna ésta
en que os halláis, que podía ser que en estos tropiezos vuestra torcida
suerte se enderezase; que el cielo, por estraños y nunca vistos rodeos, de
los hombres no imaginados, suele levantar los caídos y enriquecer los
pobres.

Ya le iba a dar las gracias don Quijote, cuando sintieron a sus espaldas un
ruido como de tropel de caballos, y no era sino un solo, sobre el cual
venía a toda furia un mancebo, al parecer de hasta veinte años, vestido de
damasco verde, con pasamanos de oro, greguescos y saltaembarca, con
sombrero terciado, a la valona, botas enceradas y justas, espuelas, daga y
espada doradas, una escopeta pequeña en las manos y dos pistolas a los
lados. Al ruido volvió Roque la cabeza y vio esta hermosa figura, la cual,
en llegando a él, dijo:

-En tu busca venía, ¡oh valeroso Roque!, para hallar en ti, si no remedio,
a lo menos alivio en mi desdicha; y, por no tenerte suspenso, porque sé que
no me has conocido, quiero decirte quién soy: y soy Claudia Jerónima, hija
de Simón Forte, tu singular amigo y enemigo particular de Clauquel
Torrellas, que asimismo lo es tuyo, por ser uno de los de tu contrario
bando; y ya sabes que este Torrellas tiene un hijo que don Vicente
Torrellas se llama, o, a lo menos, se llamaba no ha dos horas. Éste, pues,
por abreviar el cuento de mi desventura, te diré en breves palabras la que
me ha causado. Viome, requebróme, escuchéle, enamoréme, a hurto de mi
padre; porque no hay mujer, por retirada que esté y recatada que sea, a
quien no le sobre tiempo para poner en ejecución y efecto sus atropellados
deseos. Finalmente, él me prometió de ser mi esposo, y yo le di la palabra
de ser suya, sin que en obras pasásemos adelante. Supe ayer que, olvidado
de lo que me debía, se casaba con otra, y que esta mañana iba a desposarse,
nueva que me turbó el sentido y acabó la paciencia; y, por no estar mi
padre en el lugar, le tuve yo de ponerme en el traje que vees, y
apresurando el paso a este caballo, alcancé a don Vicente obra de una legua
de aquí; y, sin ponerme a dar quejas ni a oír disculpas, le disparé estas
escopetas, y, por añadidura, estas dos pistolas; y, a lo que creo, le debí
de encerrar más de dos balas en el cuerpo, abriéndole puertas por donde
envuelta en su sangre saliese mi honra. Allí le dejo entre sus criados, que
no osaron ni pudieron ponerse en su defensa. Vengo a buscarte para que me
pases a Francia, donde tengo parientes con quien viva, y asimesmo a rogarte
defiendas a mi padre, porque los muchos de don Vicente no se atrevan a
tomar en él desaforada venganza.

Roque, admirado de la gallardía, bizarría, buen talle y suceso de la
hermosa Claudia, le dijo:

-Ven, señora, y vamos a ver si es muerto tu enemigo, que después veremos lo
que más te importare.

Don Quijote, que estaba escuchando atentamente lo que Claudia había dicho y
lo que Roque Guinart respondió, dijo:

-No tiene nadie para qué tomar trabajo en defender a esta señora, que lo
tomo yo a mi cargo: denme mi caballo y mis armas, y espérenme aquí, que yo
iré a buscar a ese caballero, y, muerto o vivo, le haré cumplir la palabra
prometida a tanta belleza.

-Nadie dude de esto -dijo Sancho-, porque mi señor tiene muy buena mano
para casamentero, pues no ha muchos días que hizo casar a otro que también
negaba a otra doncella su palabra; y si no fuera porque los encantadores
que le persiguen le mudaron su verdadera figura en la de un lacayo, ésta
fuera la hora que ya la tal doncella no lo fuera.

Roque, que atendía más a pensar en el suceso de la hermosa Claudia que en
las razones de amo y mozo, no las entendió; y, mandando a sus escuderos que
volviesen a Sancho todo cuanto le habían quitado del rucio, mandándoles
asimesmo que se retirasen a la parte donde aquella noche habían estado
alojados, y luego se partió con Claudia a toda priesa a buscar al herido, o
muerto, don Vicente. Llegaron al lugar donde le encontró Claudia, y no
hallaron en él sino recién derramada sangre; pero, tendiendo la vista por
todas partes, descubrieron por un recuesto arriba alguna gente, y diéronse
a entender, como era la verdad, que debía ser don Vicente, a quien sus
criados, o muerto o vivo, llevaban, o para curarle, o para enterrarle;
diéronse priesa a alcanzarlos, que, como iban de espacio, con facilidad lo
hicieron.

Hallaron a don Vicente en los brazos de sus criados, a quien con cansada y
debilitada voz rogaba que le dejasen allí morir, porque el dolor de las
heridas no consentía que más adelante pasase.

Arrojáronse de los caballos Claudia y Roque, llegáronse a él, temieron los
criados la presencia de Roque, y Claudia se turbó en ver la de don Vicente;
y así, entre enternecida y rigurosa, se llegó a él, y asiéndole de las
manos, le dijo:

-Si tú me dieras éstas, conforme a nuestro concierto, nunca tú te vieras en
este paso.

Abrió los casi cerrados ojos el herido caballero, y, conociendo a Claudia,
le dijo:

-Bien veo, hermosa y engañada señora, que tú has sido la que me has muerto:
pena no merecida ni debida a mis deseos, con los cuales, ni con mis obras,
jamás quise ni supe ofenderte.

-Luego, ¿no es verdad -dijo Claudia- que ibas esta mañana a desposarte con
Leonora, la hija del rico Balvastro?

-No, por cierto -respondió don Vicente-; mi mala fortuna te debió de llevar
estas nuevas, para que, celosa, me quitases la vida, la cual, pues la dejo
en tus manos y en tus brazos, tengo mi suerte por venturosa. Y, para
asegurarte desta verdad, aprieta la mano y recíbeme por esposo, si
quisieres, que no tengo otra mayor satisfación que darte del agravio que
piensas que de mí has recebido.

Apretóle la mano Claudia, y apretósele a ella el corazón, de manera que
sobre la sangre y pecho de don Vicente se quedó desmayada, y a él le tomó
un mortal parasismo. Confuso estaba Roque, y no sabía qué hacerse.
Acudieron los criados a buscar agua que echarles en los rostros, y
trujéronla, con que se los bañaron. Volvió de su desmayo Claudia, pero no
de su parasismo don Vicente, porque se le acabó la vida. Visto lo cual de
Claudia, habiéndose enterado que ya su dulce esposo no vivía, rompió los
aires con suspiros, hirió los cielos con quejas, maltrató sus cabellos,
entregándolos al viento, afeó su rostro con sus propias manos, con todas
las muestras de dolor y sentimiento que de un lastimado pecho pudieran
imaginarse.

-¡Oh cruel e inconsiderada mujer -decía-, con qué facilidad te moviste a
poner en ejecución tan mal pensamiento! ¡Oh fuerza rabiosa de los celos, a
qué desesperado fin conducís a quien os da acogida en su pecho! ¡Oh esposo
mío, cuya desdichada suerte, por ser prenda mía, te ha llevado del tálamo a
la sepultura!

Tales y tan tristes eran las quejas de Claudia, que sacaron las lágrimas de
los ojos de Roque, no acostumbrados a verterlas en ninguna ocasión.
Lloraban los criados, desmayábase a cada paso Claudia, y todo aquel
circuito parecía campo de tristeza y lugar de desgracia. Finalmente, Roque
Guinart ordenó a los criados de don Vicente que llevasen su cuerpo al lugar
de su padre, que estaba allí cerca, para que le diesen sepultura. Claudia
dijo a Roque que querría irse a un monasterio donde era abadesa una tía
suya, en el cual pensaba acabar la vida, de otro mejor esposo y más eterno
acompañada. Alabóle Roque su buen propósito, ofreciósele de acompañarla
hasta donde quisiese, y de defender a su padre de los parientes y de todo
el mundo, si ofenderle quisiese. No quiso su compañía Claudia, en ninguna
manera, y, agradeciendo sus ofrecimientos con las mejores razones que supo,
se despedió dél llorando. Los criados de don Vicente llevaron su cuerpo, y
Roque se volvió a los suyos, y este fin tuvieron los amores de Claudia
Jerónima. Pero, ¿qué mucho, si tejieron la trama de su lamentable historia
las fuerzas invencibles y rigurosas de los celos?

Halló Roque Guinart a sus escuderos en la parte donde les había ordenado, y
a don Quijote entre ellos, sobre Rocinante, haciéndoles una plática en que
les persuadía dejasen aquel modo de vivir tan peligroso, así para el alma
como para el cuerpo; pero, como los más eran gascones, gente rústica y
desbaratada, no les entraba bien la plática de don Quijote. Llegado que fue
Roque, preguntó a Sancho Panza si le habían vuelto y restituido las alhajas
y preseas que los suyos del rucio le habían quitado. Sancho respondió que
sí, sino que le faltaban tres tocadores, que valían tres ciudades.

-¿Qué es lo que dices, hombre? -dijo uno de los presentes-, que yo los
tengo, y no valen tres reales.

-Así es -dijo don Quijote-, pero estímalos mi escudero en lo que ha dicho,
por habérmelos dado quien me los dio.

Mandóselos volver al punto Roque Guinart, y, mandando poner los suyos en
ala, mandó traer allí delante todos los vestidos, joyas, y dineros, y todo
aquello que desde la última repartición habían robado; y, haciendo
brevemente el tanteo, volviendo lo no repartible y reduciéndolo a dineros,
lo repartió por toda su compañía, con tanta legalidad y prudencia que no
pasó un punto ni defraudó nada de la justicia distributiva. Hecho esto, con
lo cual todos quedaron contentos, satisfechos y pagados, dijo Roque a don
Quijote:

-Si no se guardase esta puntualidad con éstos, no se podría vivir con
ellos.

A lo que dijo Sancho:

-Según lo que aquí he visto, es tan buena la justicia, que es necesaria que
se use aun entre los mesmos ladrones.

Oyólo un escudero, y enarboló el mocho de un arcabuz, con el cual, sin
duda, le abriera la cabeza a Sancho, si Roque Guinart no le diera voces que
se detuviese. Pasmóse Sancho, y propuso de no descoser los labios en tanto
que entre aquella gente estuviese.

Llegó, en esto, uno o algunos de aquellos escuderos que estaban puestos por
centinelas por los caminos para ver la gente que por ellos venía y dar
aviso a su mayor de lo que pasaba, y éste dijo:

-Señor, no lejos de aquí, por el camino que va a Barcelona, viene un gran
tropel de gente.

A lo que respondió Roque:

-¿Has echado de ver si son de los que nos buscan, o de los que nosotros
buscamos?

-No, sino de los que buscamos -respondió el escudero.

-Pues salid todos -replicó Roque-, y traédmelos aquí luego, sin que se os
escape ninguno.

Hiciéronlo así, y, quedándose solos don Quijote, Sancho y Roque, aguardaron
a ver lo que los escuderos traían; y, en este entretanto, dijo Roque a don
Quijote:

-Nueva manera de vida le debe de parecer al señor don Quijote la nuestra,
nuevas aventuras, nuevos sucesos, y todos peligrosos; y no me maravillo que
así le parezca, porque realmente le confieso que no hay modo de vivir más
inquieto ni más sobresaltado que el nuestro. A mí me han puesto en él no sé
qué deseos de venganza, que tienen fuerza de turbar los más sosegados
corazones; yo, de mi natural, soy compasivo y bien intencionado; pero, como
tengo dicho, el querer vengarme de un agravio que se me hizo, así da con
todas mis buenas inclinaciones en tierra, que persevero en este estado, a
despecho y pesar de lo que entiendo; y, como un abismo llama a otro y un
pecado a otro pecado, hanse eslabonado las venganzas de manera que no sólo
las mías, pero las ajenas tomo a mi cargo; pero Dios es servido de que,
aunque me veo en la mitad del laberinto de mis confusiones, no pierdo la
esperanza de salir dél a puerto seguro.

Admirado quedó don Quijote de oír hablar a Roque tan buenas y concertadas
razones, porque él se pensaba que, entre los de oficios semejantes de
robar, matar y saltear no podía haber alguno que tuviese buen discurso, y
respondióle:

-Señor Roque, el principio de la salud está en conocer la enfermedad y en
querer tomar el enfermo las medicinas que el médico le ordena: vuestra
merced está enfermo, conoce su dolencia, y el cielo, o Dios, por mejor
decir, que es nuestro médico, le aplicará medicinas que le sanen, las
cuales suelen sanar poco a poco y no de repente y por milagro; y más, que
los pecadores discretos están más cerca de enmendarse que los simples; y,
pues vuestra merced ha mostrado en sus razones su prudencia, no hay sino
tener buen ánimo y esperar mejoría de la enfermedad de su conciencia; y si
vuestra merced quiere ahorrar camino y ponerse con facilidad en el de su
salvación, véngase conmigo, que yo le enseñaré a ser caballero andante,
donde se pasan tantos trabajos y desventuras que, tomándolas por
penitencia, en dos paletas le pondrán en el cielo.

Rióse Roque del consejo de don Quijote, a quien, mudando plática, contó el
trágico suceso de Claudia Jerónima, de que le pesó en estremo a Sancho, que
no le había parecido mal la belleza, desenvoltura y brío de la moza.

Llegaron, en esto, los escuderos de la presa, trayendo consigo dos
caballeros a caballo, y dos peregrinos a pie, y un coche de mujeres con
hasta seis criados, que a pie y a caballo las acompañaban, con otros dos
mozos de mulas que los caballeros traían. Cogiéronlos los escuderos en
medio, guardando vencidos y vencedores gran silencio, esperando a que el
gran Roque Guinart hablase, el cual preguntó a los caballeros que quién
eran y adónde iban, y qué dinero llevaban. Uno dellos le respondió:

-Señor, nosotros somos dos capitanes de infantería española; tenemos
nuestras compañías en Nápoles y vamos a embarcarnos en cuatro galeras, que
dicen están en Barcelona con orden de pasar a Sicilia; llevamos hasta
docientos o trecientos escudos, con que, a nuestro parecer, vamos ricos y
contentos, pues la estrecheza ordinaria de los soldados no permite mayores
tesoros.

Preguntó Roque a los peregrinos lo mesmo que a los capitanes; fuele
respondido que iban a embarcarse para pasar a Roma, y que entre entrambos
podían llevar hasta sesenta reales. Quiso saber también quién iba en el
coche, y adónde, y el dinero que llevaban; y uno de los de a caballo dijo:

-Mi señora doña Guiomar de Quiñones, mujer del regente de la Vicaría de
Nápoles, con una hija pequeña, una doncella y una dueña, son las que van en
el coche; acompañámosla seis criados, y los dineros son seiscientos
escudos.

-De modo -dijo Roque Guinart-, que ya tenemos aquí novecientos escudos y
sesenta reales; mis soldados deben de ser hasta sesenta; mírese a cómo le
cabe a cada uno, porque yo soy mal contador.

Oyendo decir esto los salteadores, levantaron la voz, diciendo:

-¡Viva Roque Guinart muchos años, a pesar de los lladres que su perdición
procuran!

Mostraron afligirse los capitanes, entristecióse la señora regenta, y no se
holgaron nada los peregrinos, viendo la confiscación de sus bienes. Túvolos
así un rato suspensos Roque, pero no quiso que pasase adelante su tristeza,
que ya se podía conocer a tiro de arcabuz, y, volviéndose a los capitanes,
dijo:

-Vuesas mercedes, señores capitanes, por cortesía, sean servidos de
prestarme sesenta escudos, y la señora regenta ochenta, para contentar
esta escuadra que me acompaña, porque el abad, de lo que canta yanta, y
luego puédense ir su camino libre y desembarazadamente, con un salvoconduto
que yo les daré, para que, si toparen otras de algunas escuadras mías que
tengo divididas por estos contornos, no les hagan daño; que no es mi
intención de agraviar a soldados ni a mujer alguna, especialmente a las que
son principales.

Infinitas y bien dichas fueron las razones con que los capitanes
agradecieron a Roque su cortesía y liberalidad, que, por tal la tuvieron,
en dejarles su mismo dinero. La señora doña Guiomar de Quiñones se quiso
arrojar del coche para besar los pies y las manos del gran Roque, pero él
no lo consintió en ninguna manera; antes le pidió perdón del agravio que le
hacía, forzado de cumplir con las obligaciones precisas de su mal oficio.
Mandó la señora regenta a un criado suyo diese luego los ochenta escudos
que le habían repartido, y ya los capitanes habían desembolsado los
sesenta. Iban los peregrinos a dar toda su miseria, pero Roque les dijo que
se estuviesen quedos, y volviéndose a los suyos, les dijo:

-Destos escudos dos tocan a cada uno, y sobran veinte: los diez se den a
estos peregrinos, y los otros diez a este buen escudero, porque pueda decir
bien de esta aventura.

Y, trayéndole aderezo de escribir, de que siempre andaba proveído, Roque
les dio por escrito un salvoconduto para los mayorales de sus escuadras, y,
despidiéndose dellos, los dejó ir libres, y admirados de su nobleza, de su
gallarda disposición y estraño proceder, teniéndole más por un Alejandro
Magno que por ladrón conocido. Uno de los escuderos dijo en su lengua
gascona y catalana:

-Este nuestro capitán más es para frade que para bandolero: si de aquí
adelante quisiere mostrarse liberal séalo con su hacienda y no con la
nuestra.

No lo dijo tan paso el desventurado que dejase de oírlo Roque, el cual,
echando mano a la espada, le abrió la cabeza casi en dos partes,
diciéndole:

-Desta manera castigo yo a los deslenguados y atrevidos.

Pasmáronse todos, y ninguno le osó decir palabra: tanta era la obediencia
que le tenían.

Apartóse Roque a una parte y escribió una carta a un su amigo, a Barcelona,
dándole aviso como estaba consigo el famoso don Quijote de la Mancha, aquel
caballero andante de quien tantas cosas se decían; y que le hacía saber que
era el más gracioso y el más entendido hombre del mundo, y que de allí a
cuatro días, que era el de San Juan Bautista, se le pondría en mitad de la
playa de la ciudad, armado de todas sus armas, sobre Rocinante, su caballo,
y a su escudero Sancho sobre un asno, y que diese noticia desto a sus
amigos los Niarros, para que con él se solazasen; que él quisiera que
carecieran deste gusto los Cadells, sus contrarios, pero que esto era
imposible, a causa que las locuras y discreciones de don Quijote y los
donaires de su escudero Sancho Panza no podían dejar de dar gusto general a
todo el mundo. Despachó estas cartas con uno de sus escuderos, que, mudando
el traje de bandolero en el de un labrador, entró en Barcelona y la dio a
quien iba.





Capítulo LXI. De lo que le sucedió a don Quijote en la entrada de
Barcelona, con otras cosas que tienen más de lo verdadero que de lo
discreto


Tres días y tres noches estuvo don Quijote con Roque, y si estuviera
trecientos años, no le faltara qué mirar y admirar en el modo de su vida:
aquí amanecían, acullá comían; unas veces huían, sin saber de quién, y
otras esperaban, sin saber a quién. Dormían en pie, interrompiendo el
sueño, mudándose de un lugar a otro. Todo era poner espías, escuchar
centinelas, soplar las cuerdas de los arcabuces, aunque traían pocos,
porque todos se servían de pedreñales. Roque pasaba las noches apartado de
los suyos, en partes y lugares donde ellos no pudiesen saber dónde estaba;
porque los muchos bandos que el visorrey de Barcelona había echado sobre su
vida le traían inquieto y temeroso, y no se osaba fiar de ninguno, temiendo
que los mismos suyos, o le habían de matar, o entregar a la justicia: vida,
por cierto, miserable y enfadosa.

En fin, por caminos desusados, por atajos y sendas encubiertas, partieron
Roque, don Quijote y Sancho con otros seis escuderos a Barcelona. Llegaron
a su playa la víspera de San Juan en la noche, y, abrazando Roque a don
Quijote y a Sancho, a quien dio los diez escudos prometidos, que hasta
entonces no se los había dado, los dejó, con mil ofrecimientos que de la
una a la otra parte se hicieron.

Volvióse Roque; quedóse don Quijote esperando el día, así, a caballo, como
estaba, y no tardó mucho cuando comenzó a descubrirse por los balcones del
Oriente la faz de la blanca aurora, alegrando las yerbas y las flores, en
lugar de alegrar el oído; aunque al mesmo instante alegraron también el
oído el son de muchas chirimías y atabales, ruido de cascabeles, ''¡trapa,
trapa, aparta, aparta!'' de corredores, que, al parecer, de la ciudad
salían. Dio lugar la aurora al sol, que, un rostro mayor que el de una
rodela, por el más bajo horizonte, poco a poco, se iba levantando.

Tendieron don Quijote y Sancho la vista por todas partes: vieron el mar,
hasta entonces dellos no visto; parecióles espaciosísimo y largo, harto más
que las lagunas de Ruidera, que en la Mancha habían visto; vieron las
galeras que estaban en la playa, las cuales, abatiendo las tiendas, se
descubrieron llenas de flámulas y gallardetes, que tremolaban al viento y
besaban y barrían el agua; dentro sonaban clarines, trompetas y chirimías,
que cerca y lejos llenaban el aire de suaves y belicosos acentos.
Comenzaron a moverse y a hacer modo de escaramuza por las sosegadas aguas,
correspondiéndoles casi al mismo modo infinitos caballeros que de la ciudad
sobre hermosos caballos y con vistosas libreas salían. Los soldados de las
galeras disparaban infinita artillería, a quien respondían los que estaban
en las murallas y fuertes de la ciudad, y la artillería gruesa con
espantoso estruendo rompía los vientos, a quien respondían los cañones de
crujía de las galeras. El mar alegre, la tierra jocunda, el aire claro,
sólo tal vez turbio del humo de la artillería, parece que iba infundiendo y
engendrando gusto súbito en todas las gentes.

No podía imaginar Sancho cómo pudiesen tener tantos pies aquellos bultos
que por el mar se movían. En esto, llegaron corriendo, con grita, lililíes
y algazara, los de las libreas adonde don Quijote suspenso y atónito
estaba, y uno dellos, que era el avisado de Roque, dijo en alta voz a don
Quijote:

-Bien sea venido a nuestra ciudad el espejo, el farol, la estrella y el
norte de toda la caballería andante, donde más largamente se contiene. Bien
sea venido, digo, el valeroso don Quijote de la Mancha: no el falso, no el
ficticio, no el apócrifo que en falsas historias estos días nos han
mostrado, sino el verdadero, el legal y el fiel que nos describió Cide
Hamete Benengeli, flor de los historiadores.

No respondió don Quijote palabra, ni los caballeros esperaron a que la
respondiese, sino, volviéndose y revolviéndose con los demás que los
seguían, comenzaron a hacer un revuelto caracol al derredor de don Quijote;
el cual, volviéndose a Sancho, dijo:

-Éstos bien nos han conocido: yo apostaré que han leído nuestra historia y
aun la del aragonés recién impresa.

Volvió otra vez el caballero que habló a don Quijote, y díjole:

-Vuesa merced, señor don Quijote, se venga con nosotros, que todos somos
sus servidores y grandes amigos de Roque Guinart.

A lo que don Quijote respondió:

-Si cortesías engendran cortesías, la vuestra, señor caballero, es hija o
parienta muy cercana de las del gran Roque. Llevadme do quisiéredes, que yo
no tendré otra voluntad que la vuestra, y más si la queréis ocupar en
vuestro servicio.

Con palabras no menos comedidas que éstas le respondió el caballero, y,
encerrándole todos en medio, al son de las chirimías y de los atabales, se
encaminaron con él a la ciudad, al entrar de la cual, el malo, que todo lo
malo ordena, y los muchachos, que son más malos que el malo, dos dellos
traviesos y atrevidos se entraron por toda la gente, y, alzando el uno de
la cola del rucio y el otro la de Rocinante, les pusieron y encajaron
sendos manojos de aliagas. Sintieron los pobres animales las nuevas
espuelas, y, apretando las colas, aumentaron su disgusto, de manera que,
dando mil corcovos, dieron con sus dueños en tierra. Don Quijote, corrido y
afrentado, acudió a quitar el plumaje de la cola de su matalote, y Sancho,
el de su rucio. Quisieran los que guiaban a don Quijote castigar el
atrevimiento de los muchachos, y no fue posible, porque se encerraron entre
más de otros mil que los seguían.

Volvieron a subir don Quijote y Sancho; con el mismo aplauso y música
llegaron a la casa de su guía, que era grande y principal, en fin, como de
caballero rico; donde le dejaremos por agora, porque así lo quiere Cide
Hamete.





Capítulo LXII. Que trata de la aventura de la cabeza encantada, con otras
niñerías que no pueden dejar de contarse


Don Antonio Moreno se llamaba el huésped de don Quijote, caballero rico y
discreto, y amigo de holgarse a lo honesto y afable, el cual, viendo en su
casa a don Quijote, andaba buscando modos como, sin su perjuicio, sacase a
plaza sus locuras; porque no son burlas las que duelen, ni hay pasatiempos
que valgan si son con daño de tercero. Lo primero que hizo fue hacer
desarmar a don Quijote y sacarle a vistas con aquel su estrecho y acamuzado
vestido -como ya otras veces le hemos descrito y pintado- a un balcón que
salía a una calle de las más principales de la ciudad, a vista de las
gentes y de los muchachos, que como a mona le miraban. Corrieron de nuevo
delante dél los de las libreas, como si para él solo, no para alegrar aquel
festivo día, se las hubieran puesto; y Sancho estaba contentísimo, por
parecerle que se había hallado, sin saber cómo ni cómo no, otras bodas de
Camacho, otra casa como la de don Diego de Miranda y otro castillo como el
del duque.

Comieron aquel día con don Antonio algunos de sus amigos, honrando todos y
tratando a don Quijote como a caballero andante, de lo cual, hueco y
pomposo, no cabía en sí de contento. Los donaires de Sancho fueron tantos,
que de su boca andaban como colgados todos los criados de casa y todos
cuantos le oían. Estando a la mesa, dijo don Antonio a Sancho:

-Acá tenemos noticia, buen Sancho, que sois tan amigo de manjar blanco y de
albondiguillas, que, si os sobran, las guardáis en el seno para el otro
día.

-No, señor, no es así -respondió Sancho-, porque tengo más de limpio que de
goloso, y mi señor don Quijote, que está delante, sabe bien que con un puño
de bellotas, o de nueces, nos solemos pasar entrambos ocho días. Verdad es
que si tal vez me sucede que me den la vaquilla, corro con la soguilla;
quiero decir que como lo que me dan, y uso de los tiempos como los hallo; y
quienquiera que hubiere dicho que yo soy comedor aventajado y no limpio,
téngase por dicho que no acierta; y de otra manera dijera esto si no mirara
a las barbas honradas que están a la mesa.

-Por cierto -dijo don Quijote-, que la parsimonia y limpieza con que Sancho
come se puede escribir y grabar en láminas de bronce, para que quede en
memoria eterna de los siglos venideros. Verdad es que, cuando él tiene
hambre, parece algo tragón, porque come apriesa y masca a dos carrillos;
pero la limpieza siempre la tiene en su punto, y en el tiempo que fue
gobernador aprendió a comer a lo melindroso: tanto, que comía con tenedor
las uvas y aun los granos de la granada.

-¡Cómo! -dijo don Antonio-. ¿Gobernador ha sido Sancho?

-Sí -respondió Sancho-, y de una ínsula llamada la Barataria. Diez días la
goberné a pedir de boca; en ellos perdí el sosiego, y aprendí a despreciar
todos los gobiernos del mundo; salí huyendo della, caí en una cueva, donde
me tuve por muerto, de la cual salí vivo por milagro.

Contó don Quijote por menudo todo el suceso del gobierno de Sancho, con que
dio gran gusto a los oyentes.

Levantados los manteles, y tomando don Antonio por la mano a don Quijote,
se entró con él en un apartado aposento, en el cual no había otra cosa de
adorno que una mesa, al parecer de jaspe, que sobre un pie de lo mesmo se
sostenía, sobre la cual estaba puesta, al modo de las cabezas de los
emperadores romanos, de los pechos arriba, una que semejaba ser de bronce.
Paseóse don Antonio con don Quijote por todo el aposento, rodeando muchas
veces la mesa, después de lo cual dijo:

-Agora, señor don Quijote, que estoy enterado que no nos oye y escucha
alguno, y está cerrada la puerta, quiero contar a vuestra merced una de las
más raras aventuras, o, por mejor decir, novedades que imaginarse pueden,
con condición que lo que a vuestra merced dijere lo ha de depositar en los
últimos retretes del secreto.

-Así lo juro -respondió don Quijote-, y aun le echaré una losa encima, para
más seguridad; porque quiero que sepa vuestra merced, señor don Antonio
-que ya sabía su nombre-, que está hablando con quien, aunque tiene oídos
para oír, no tiene lengua para hablar; así que, con seguridad puede vuestra
merced trasladar lo que tiene en su pecho en el mío y hacer cuenta que lo
ha arrojado en los abismos del silencio.

-En fee de esa promesa -respondió don Antonio-, quiero poner a vuestra
merced en admiración con lo que viere y oyere, y darme a mí algún alivio de
la pena que me causa no tener con quien comunicar mis secretos, que no son
para fiarse de todos.

Suspenso estaba don Quijote, esperando en qué habían de parar tantas
prevenciones. En esto, tomándole la mano don Antonio, se la paseó por la
cabeza de bronce y por toda la mesa, y por el pie de jaspe sobre que se
sostenía, y luego dijo:

-Esta cabeza, señor don Quijote, ha sido hecha y fabricada por uno de los
mayores encantadores y hechiceros que ha tenido el mundo, que creo era
polaco de nación y dicípulo del famoso Escotillo, de quien tantas
maravillas se cuentan; el cual estuvo aquí en mi casa, y por precio de mil
escudos que le di, labró esta cabeza, que tiene propiedad y virtud de
responder a cuantas cosas al oído le preguntaren. Guardó rumbos, pintó
carácteres, observó astros, miró puntos, y, finalmente, la sacó con la
perfeción que veremos mañana, porque los viernes está muda, y hoy, que lo
es, nos ha de hacer esperar hasta mañana. En este tiempo podrá vuestra
merced prevenirse de lo que querrá preguntar, que por esperiencia sé que
dice verdad en cuanto responde.

Admirado quedó don Quijote de la virtud y propiedad de la cabeza, y estuvo
por no creer a don Antonio; pero, por ver cuán poco tiempo había para hacer
la experiencia, no quiso decirle otra cosa sino que le agradecía el haberle
descubierto tan gran secreto. Salieron del aposento, cerró la puerta don
Antonio con llave, y fuéronse a la sala, donde los demás caballeros
estaban. En este tiempo les había contado Sancho muchas de las aventuras y
sucesos que a su amo habían acontecido.

Aquella tarde sacaron a pasear a don Quijote, no armado, sino de rúa,
vestido un balandrán de paño leonado, que pudiera hacer sudar en aquel
tiempo al mismo yelo. Ordenaron con sus criados que entretuviesen a Sancho
de modo que no le dejasen salir de casa. Iba don Quijote, no sobre
Rocinante, sino sobre un gran macho de paso llano, y muy bien aderezado.
Pusiéronle el balandrán, y en las espaldas, sin que lo viese, le cosieron
un pargamino, donde le escribieron con letras grandes: Éste es don Quijote
de la Mancha. En comenzando el paseo, llevaba el rétulo los ojos de cuantos
venían a verle, y como leían: Éste es don Quijote de la Mancha, admirábase
don Quijote de ver que cuantos le miraban le nombraban y conocían; y,
volviéndose a don Antonio, que iba a su lado, le dijo:

-Grande es la prerrogativa que encierra en sí la andante caballería, pues
hace conocido y famoso al que la profesa por todos los términos de la
tierra; si no, mire vuestra merced, señor don Antonio, que hasta los
muchachos desta ciudad, sin nunca haberme visto, me conocen.

-Así es, señor don Quijote -respondió don Antonio-, que, así como el fuego
no puede estar escondido y encerrado, la virtud no puede dejar de ser
conocida, y la que se alcanza por la profesión de las armas resplandece y
campea sobre todas las otras.

Acaeció, pues, que, yendo don Quijote con el aplauso que se ha dicho, un
castellano que leyó el rétulo de las espaldas, alzó la voz, diciendo:

-¡Válgate el diablo por don Quijote de la Mancha! ¿Cómo que hasta aquí has
llegado, sin haberte muerto los infinitos palos que tienes a cuestas? Tu
eres loco, y si lo fueras a solas y dentro de las puertas de tu locura,
fuera menos mal; pero tienes propiedad de volver locos y mentecatos a
cuantos te tratan y comunican; si no, mírenlo por estos señores que te
acompañan. Vuélvete, mentecato, a tu casa, y mira por tu hacienda, por tu
mujer y tus hijos, y déjate destas vaciedades que te carcomen el seso y te
desnatan el entendimiento.

-Hermano -dijo don Antonio-, seguid vuestro camino, y no deis consejos a
quien no os los pide. El señor don Quijote de la Mancha es muy cuerdo, y
nosotros, que le acompañamos, no somos necios; la virtud se ha de honrar
dondequiera que se hallare, y andad en hora mala, y no os metáis donde no
os llaman.

-Pardiez, vuesa merced tiene razón -respondió el castellano-, que aconsejar
a este buen hombre es dar coces contra el aguijón; pero, con todo eso, me
da muy gran lástima que el buen ingenio que dicen que tiene en todas las
cosas este mentecato se le desagüe por la canal de su andante caballería; y
la enhoramala que vuesa merced dijo, sea para mí y para todos mis
descendientes si de hoy más, aunque viviese más años que Matusalén, diere
consejo a nadie, aunque me lo pida.

Apartóse el consejero; siguió adelante el paseo; pero fue tanta la priesa
que los muchachos y toda la gente tenía leyendo el rétulo, que se le hubo
de quitar don Antonio, como que le quitaba otra cosa.

Llegó la noche, volviéronse a casa; hubo sarao de damas, porque la mujer de
don Antonio, que era una señora principal y alegre, hermosa y discreta,
convidó a otras sus amigas a que viniesen a honrar a su huésped y a gustar
de sus nunca vistas locuras. Vinieron algunas, cenóse espléndidamente y
comenzóse el sarao casi a las diez de la noche. Entre las damas había dos
de gusto pícaro y burlonas, y, con ser muy honestas, eran algo
descompuestas, por dar lugar que las burlas alegrasen sin enfado. Éstas
dieron tanta priesa en sacar a danzar a don Quijote, que le molieron, no
sólo el cuerpo, pero el ánima. Era cosa de ver la figura de don Quijote,
largo, tendido, flaco, amarillo, estrecho en el vestido, desairado, y,
sobre todo, no nada ligero. Requebrábanle como a hurto las damiselas, y él,
también como a hurto, las desdeñaba; pero, viéndose apretar de requiebros,
alzó la voz y dijo:

-Fugite, partes adversae!: dejadme en mi sosiego, pensamientos mal venidos.
Allá os avenid, señoras, con vuestros deseos, que la que es reina de los
míos, la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, no consiente que ningunos otros que
los suyos me avasallen y rindan.

Y, diciendo esto, se sentó en mitad de la sala, en el suelo, molido y
quebrantado de tan bailador ejercicio. Hizo don Antonio que le llevasen en
peso a su lecho, y el primero que asió dél fue Sancho, diciéndole:

-¡Nora en tal, señor nuestro amo, lo habéis bailado! ¿Pensáis que todos los
valientes son danzadores y todos los andantes caballeros bailarines? Digo
que si lo pensáis, que estáis engañado; hombre hay que se atreverá a matar
a un gigante antes que hacer una cabriola. Si hubiérades de zapatear, yo
supliera vuestra falta, que zapateo como un girifalte; pero en lo del
danzar, no doy puntada.

Con estas y otras razones dio que reír Sancho a los del sarao, y dio con su
amo en la cama, arropándole para que sudase la frialdad de su baile.

Otro día le pareció a don Antonio ser bien hacer la experiencia de la
cabeza encantada, y con don Quijote, Sancho y otros dos amigos, con las dos
señoras que habían molido a don Quijote en el baile, que aquella propia
noche se habían quedado con la mujer de don Antonio, se encerró en la
estancia donde estaba la cabeza. Contóles la propiedad que tenía,
encargóles el secreto y díjoles que aquél era el primero día donde se había
de probar la virtud de la tal cabeza encantada; y si no eran los dos amigos
de don Antonio, ninguna otra persona sabía el busilis del encanto, y aun si
don Antonio no se le hubiera descubierto primero a sus amigos, también
ellos cayeran en la admiración en que los demás cayeron, sin ser posible
otra cosa: con tal traza y tal orden estaba fabricada.

El primero que se llegó al oído de la cabeza fue el mismo don Antonio, y
díjole en voz sumisa, pero no tanto que de todos no fuese entendida:

-Dime, cabeza, por la virtud que en ti se encierra: ¿qué pensamientos tengo
yo agora?

Y la cabeza le respondió, sin mover los labios, con voz clara y distinta,
de modo que fue de todos entendida, esta razón:

-Yo no juzgo de pensamientos.

Oyendo lo cual, todos quedaron atónitos, y más viendo que en todo el
aposento ni al derredor de la mesa no había persona humana que responder
pudiese.

-¿Cuántos estamos aquí? -tornó a preguntar don Antonio.

Y fuele respondido por el propio tenor, paso:

-Estáis tú y tu mujer, con dos amigos tuyos, y dos amigas della, y un
caballero famoso llamado don Quijote de la Mancha, y un su escudero que
Sancho Panza tiene por nombre.

¡Aquí sí que fue el admirarse de nuevo, aquí sí que fue el erizarse los
cabellos a todos de puro espanto! Y, apartándose don Antonio de la cabeza,
dijo:

-Esto me basta para darme a entender que no fui engañado del que te me
vendió, ¡cabeza sabia, cabeza habladora, cabeza respondona y admirable
cabeza! Llegue otro y pregúntele lo que quisiere.

Y, como las mujeres de ordinario son presurosas y amigas de saber, la
primera que se llegó fue una de las dos amigas de la mujer de don Antonio,
y lo que le preguntó fue:

-Dime, cabeza, ¿qué haré yo para ser muy hermosa?

Y fuele respondido:

-Sé muy honesta.

-No te pregunto más -dijo la preguntanta.

Llegó luego la compañera, y dijo:

-Querría saber, cabeza, si mi marido me quiere bien, o no.

Y respondiéronle:

-Mira las obras que te hace, y echarlo has de ver.

Apartóse la casada diciendo:

-Esta respuesta no tenía necesidad de pregunta, porque, en efecto, las
obras que se hacen declaran la voluntad que tiene el que las hace.

Luego llegó uno de los dos amigos de don Antonio, y preguntóle:

-¿Quién soy yo?

Y fuele respondido:

-Tú lo sabes.

-No te pregunto eso -respondió el caballero-, sino que me digas si me
conoces tú.

-Sí conozco -le respondieron-, que eres don Pedro Noriz.

-No quiero saber más, pues esto basta para entender, ¡oh cabeza!, que lo
sabes todo.

Y, apartándose, llegó el otro amigo y preguntóle:

-Dime, cabeza, ¿qué deseos tiene mi hijo el mayorazgo?

-Ya yo he dicho -le respondieron- que yo no juzgo de deseos, pero, con todo
eso, te sé decir que los que tu hijo tiene son de enterrarte.

-Eso es -dijo el caballero-: lo que veo por los ojos, con el dedo lo
señalo.

Y no preguntó más. Llegóse la mujer de don Antonio, y dijo:

-Yo no sé, cabeza, qué preguntarte; sólo querría saber de ti si gozaré
muchos años de buen marido.

Y respondiéronle:

-Sí gozarás, porque su salud y su templanza en el vivir prometen muchos
años de vida, la cual muchos suelen acortar por su destemplanza.

Llegóse luego don Quijote, y dijo:

-Dime tú, el que respondes: ¿fue verdad o fue sueño lo que yo cuento que me
pasó en la cueva de Montesinos? ¿Serán ciertos los azotes de Sancho mi
escudero? ¿Tendrá efeto el desencanto de Dulcinea?

-A lo de la cueva -respondieron- hay mucho que decir: de todo tiene; los
azotes de Sancho irán de espacio, el desencanto de Dulcinea llegará a
debida ejecución.

-No quiero saber más -dijo don Quijote-; que como yo vea a Dulcinea
desencantada, haré cuenta que vienen de golpe todas las venturas que
acertare a desear.

El último preguntante fue Sancho, y lo que preguntó fue:

-¿Por ventura, cabeza, tendré otro gobierno? ¿Saldré de la estrecheza de
escudero? ¿Volveré a ver a mi mujer y a mis hijos?

A lo que le respondieron:

-Gobernarás en tu casa; y si vuelves a ella, verás a tu mujer y a tus
hijos; y, dejando de servir, dejarás de ser escudero.

-¡Bueno, par Dios! -dijo Sancho Panza-. Esto yo me lo dijera: no dijera más
el profeta Perogrullo.

-Bestia -dijo don Quijote-, ¿qué quieres que te respondan? ¿No basta que
las respuestas que esta cabeza ha dado correspondan a lo que se le
pregunta?

-Sí basta -respondió Sancho-, pero quisiera yo que se declarara más y me
dijera más.

Con esto se acabaron las preguntas y las respuestas, pero no se acabó la
admiración en que todos quedaron, excepto los dos amigos de don Antonio,
que el caso sabían. El cual quiso Cide Hamete Benengeli declarar luego, por
no tener suspenso al mundo, creyendo que algún hechicero y extraordinario
misterio en la tal cabeza se encerraba; y así, dice que don Antonio Moreno,
a imitación de otra cabeza que vio en Madrid, fabricada por un estampero,
hizo ésta en su casa, para entretenerse y suspender a los ignorantes; y la
fábrica era de esta suerte: la tabla de la mesa era de palo, pintada y
barnizada como jaspe, y el pie sobre que se sostenía era de lo mesmo, con
cuatro garras de águila que dél salían, para mayor firmeza del peso. La
cabeza, que parecía medalla y figura de emperador romano, y de color de
bronce, estaba toda hueca, y ni más ni menos la tabla de la mesa, en que se
encajaba tan justamente, que ninguna señal de juntura se parecía. El pie de
la tabla era ansimesmo hueco, que respondía a la garganta y pechos de la
cabeza, y todo esto venía a responder a otro aposento que debajo de la
estancia de la cabeza estaba. Por todo este hueco de pie, mesa, garganta y
pechos de la medalla y figura referida se encaminaba un cañón de hoja de
lata, muy justo, que de nadie podía ser visto. En el aposento de abajo
correspondiente al de arriba se ponía el que había de responder, pegada la
boca con el mesmo cañón, de modo que, a modo de cerbatana, iba la voz de
arriba abajo y de abajo arriba, en palabras articuladas y claras; y de esta
manera no era posible conocer el embuste. Un sobrino de don Antonio,
estudiante agudo y discreto, fue el respondiente; el cual, estando avisado
de su señor tío de los que habían de entrar con él en aquel día en el
aposento de la cabeza, le fue fácil responder con presteza y puntualidad a
la primera pregunta; a las demás respondió por conjeturas, y, como
discreto, discretamente. Y dice más Cide Hamete: que hasta diez o doce días
duró esta maravillosa máquina; pero que, divulgándose por la ciudad que don
Antonio tenía en su casa una cabeza encantada, que a cuantos le preguntaban
respondía, temiendo no llegase a los oídos de las despiertas centinelas de
nuestra Fe, habiendo declarado el caso a los señores inquisidores, le
mandaron que lo deshiciese y no pasase más adelante, porque el vulgo
ignorante no se escandalizase; pero en la opinión de don Quijote y de
Sancho Panza, la cabeza quedó por encantada y por respondona, más a
satisfación de don Quijote que de Sancho.

Los caballeros de la ciudad, por complacer a don Antonio y por agasajar a
don Quijote y dar lugar a que descubriese sus sandeces, ordenaron de correr
sortija de allí a seis días; que no tuvo efecto por la ocasión que se dirá
adelante. Diole gana a don Quijote de pasear la ciudad a la llana y a pie,
temiendo que, si iba a caballo, le habían de perseguir los mochachos, y
así, él y Sancho, con otros dos criados que don Antonio le dio, salieron a
pasearse.

Sucedió, pues, que, yendo por una calle, alzó los ojos don Quijote, y vio
escrito sobre una puerta, con letras muy grandes: Aquí se imprimen libros;
de lo que se contentó mucho, porque hasta entonces no había visto emprenta
alguna, y deseaba saber cómo fuese. Entró dentro, con todo su
acompañamiento, y vio tirar en una parte, corregir en otra, componer en
ésta, enmendar en aquélla, y, finalmente, toda aquella máquina que en las
emprentas grandes se muestra. Llegábase don Quijote a un cajón y preguntaba
qué era aquéllo que allí se hacía; dábanle cuenta los oficiales, admirábase
y pasaba adelante. Llegó en otras a uno, y preguntóle qué era lo que hacía.
El oficial le respondió:

-Señor, este caballero que aquí está -y enseñóle a un hombre de muy buen
talle y parecer y de alguna gravedad- ha traducido un libro toscano en
nuestra lengua castellana, y estoyle yo componiendo, para darle a la
estampa.

-¿Qué título tiene el libro? -preguntó don Quijote.

-A lo que el autor respondió:

-Señor, el libro, en toscano, se llama Le bagatele.

-Y ¿qué responde le bagatele en nuestro castellano? -preguntó don Quijote.

-Le bagatele -dijo el autor- es como si en castellano dijésemos los
juguetes; y, aunque este libro es en el nombre humilde, contiene y
encierra en sí cosas muy buenas y sustanciales.

-Yo -dijo don Quijote- sé algún tanto de el toscano, y me precio de cantar
algunas estancias del Ariosto. Pero dígame vuesa merced, señor mío, y no
digo esto porque quiero examinar el ingenio de vuestra merced, sino por
curiosidad no más: ¿ha hallado en su escritura alguna vez nombrar piñata?

-Sí, muchas veces -respondió el autor.

-Y ¿cómo la traduce vuestra merced en castellano? -preguntó don Quijote.

-¿Cómo la había de traducir -replicó el autor-, sino diciendo olla?

-¡Cuerpo de tal -dijo don Quijote-, y qué adelante está vuesa merced en el
toscano idioma! Yo apostaré una buena apuesta que adonde diga en el toscano
piache, dice vuesa merced en el castellano place; y adonde diga più, dice
más, y el su declara con arriba, y el giù con abajo.

-Sí declaro, por cierto -dijo el autor-, porque ésas son sus propias
correspondencias.

-Osaré yo jurar -dijo don Quijote- que no es vuesa merced conocido en el
mundo, enemigo siempre de premiar los floridos ingenios ni los loables
trabajos. ¡Qué de habilidades hay perdidas por ahí! ¡Qué de ingenios
arrinconados! ¡Qué de virtudes menospreciadas! Pero, con todo esto, me
parece que el traducir de una lengua en otra, como no sea de las reinas de
las lenguas, griega y latina, es como quien mira los tapices flamencos por
el revés, que, aunque se veen las figuras, son llenas de hilos que las
escurecen, y no se veen con la lisura y tez de la haz; y el traducir de
lenguas fáciles, ni arguye ingenio ni elocución, como no le arguye el que
traslada ni el que copia un papel de otro papel. Y no por esto quiero
inferir que no sea loable este ejercicio del traducir; porque en otras
cosas peores se podría ocupar el hombre, y que menos provecho le trujesen.
Fuera desta cuenta van los dos famosos traductores: el uno, el doctor
Cristóbal de Figueroa, en su Pastor Fido, y el otro, don Juan de Jáurigui,
en su Aminta, donde felizmente ponen en duda cuál es la tradución o cuál el
original. Pero dígame vuestra merced: este libro, ¿imprímese por su cuenta,
o tiene ya vendido el privilegio a algún librero?

-Por mi cuenta lo imprimo -respondió el autor-, y pienso ganar mil ducados,
por lo menos, con esta primera impresión, que ha de ser de dos mil cuerpos,
y se han de despachar a seis reales cada uno, en daca las pajas.

-¡Bien está vuesa merced en la cuenta! -respondió don Quijote-. Bien parece
que no sabe las entradas y salidas de los impresores, y las
correspondencias que hay de unos a otros; yo le prometo que, cuando se vea
cargado de dos mil cuerpos de libros, vea tan molido su cuerpo, que se
espante, y más si el libro es un poco avieso y no nada picante.

-Pues, ¿qué? -dijo el autor-. ¿Quiere vuesa merced que se lo dé a un
librero, que me dé por el privilegio tres maravedís, y aún piensa que me
hace merced en dármelos? Yo no imprimo mis libros para alcanzar fama en el
mundo, que ya en él soy conocido por mis obras: provecho quiero, que sin él
no vale un cuatrín la buena fama.

-Dios le dé a vuesa merced buena manderecha -respondió don Quijote.

Y pasó adelante a otro cajón, donde vio que estaban corrigiendo un pliego
de un libro que se intitulaba Luz del alma; y,en viéndole, dijo:

-Estos tales libros, aunque hay muchos deste género, son los que se deben
imprimir, porque son muchos los pecadores que se usan, y son menester
infinitas luces para tantos desalumbrados.

Pasó adelante y vio que asimesmo estaban corrigiendo otro libro; y,
preguntando su título, le respondieron que se llamaba la Segunda parte del
Ingenioso Hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, compuesta por un tal vecino de
Tordesillas.

-Ya yo tengo noticia deste libro -dijo don Quijote-, y en verdad y en mi
conciencia que pensé que ya estaba quemado y hecho polvos, por
impertinente; pero su San Martín se le llegará, como a cada puerco, que las
historias fingidas tanto tienen de buenas y de deleitables cuanto se llegan
a la verdad o la semejanza della, y las verdaderas tanto son mejores cuanto
son más verdaderas.

Y, diciendo esto, con muestras de algún despecho, se salió de la emprenta.
Y aquel mesmo día ordenó don Antonio de llevarle a ver las galeras que en
la playa estaban, de que Sancho se regocijó mucho, a causa que en su vida
las había visto. Avisó don Antonio al cuatralbo de las galeras como aquella
tarde había de llevar a verlas a su huésped el famoso don Quijote de la
Mancha, de quien ya el cuatralbo y todos los vecinos de la ciudad tenían
noticia; y lo que le sucedió en ellas se dirá en el siguiente capítulo.





Capítulo LXIII. De lo mal que le avino a Sancho Panza con la visita de las
galeras, y la nueva aventura de la hermosa morisca


Grandes eran los discursos que don Quijote hacía sobre la respuesta de la
encantada cabeza, sin que ninguno dellos diese en el embuste, y todos
paraban con la promesa, que él tuvo por cierto, del desencanto de Dulcinea.
Allí iba y venía, y se alegraba entre sí mismo, creyendo que había de ver
presto su cumplimiento; y Sancho, aunque aborrecía el ser gobernador, como
queda dicho, todavía deseaba volver a mandar y a ser obedecido; que esta
mala ventura trae consigo el mando, aunque sea de burlas.

En resolución, aquella tarde don Antonio Moreno, su huésped, y sus dos
amigos, con don Quijote y Sancho, fueron a las galeras. El cuatralbo, que
estaba avisado de su buena venida, por ver a los dos tan famosos Quijote y
Sancho, apenas llegaron a la marina, cuando todas las galeras abatieron
tienda, y sonaron las chirimías; arrojaron luego el esquife al agua,
cubierto de ricos tapetes y de almohadas de terciopelo carmesí, y, en
poniendo que puso los pies en él don Quijote, disparó la capitana el cañón
de crujía, y las otras galeras hicieron lo mesmo, y, al subir don Quijote
por la escala derecha, toda la chusma le saludó como es usanza cuando una
persona principal entra en la galera, diciendo: ''¡Hu, hu, hu!'' tres
veces. Diole la mano el general, que con este nombre le llamaremos, que era
un principal caballero valenciano; abrazó a don Quijote, diciéndole:

-Este día señalaré yo con piedra blanca, por ser uno de los mejores que
pienso llevar en mi vida, habiendo visto al señor don Quijote de la Mancha:
tiempo y señal que nos muestra que en él se encierra y cifra todo el valor
del andante caballería.

Con otras no menos corteses razones le respondió don Quijote, alegre
sobremanera de verse tratar tan a lo señor. Entraron todos en la popa, que
estaba muy bien aderezada, y sentáronse por los bandines, pasóse el cómitre
en crujía, y dio señal con el pito que la chusma hiciese fuera ropa, que se
hizo en un instante. Sancho, que vio tanta gente en cueros, quedó pasmado,
y más cuando vio hacer tienda con tanta priesa, que a él le pareció que
todos los diablos andaban allí trabajando; pero esto todo fueron tortas y
pan pintado para lo que ahora diré. Estaba Sancho sentado sobre el
estanterol, junto al espalder de la mano derecha, el cual ya avisado de lo
que había de hacer, asió de Sancho, y, levantándole en los brazos, toda la
chusma puesta en pie y alerta, comenzando de la derecha banda, le fue dando
y volteando sobre los brazos de la chusma de banco en banco, con tanta
priesa, que el pobre Sancho perdió la vista de los ojos, y sin duda pensó
que los mismos demonios le llevaban, y no pararon con él hasta volverle por
la siniestra banda y ponerle en la popa. Quedó el pobre molido, y jadeando,
y trasudando, sin poder imaginar qué fue lo que sucedido le había.

Don Quijote, que vio el vuelo sin alas de Sancho, preguntó al general si
eran ceremonias aquéllas que se usaban con los primeros que entraban en las
galeras; porque si acaso lo fuese, él, que no tenía intención de profesar
en ellas, no quería hacer semejantes ejercicios, y que votaba a Dios que,
si alguno llegaba a asirle para voltearle, que le había de sacar el alma a
puntillazos; y, diciendo esto, se levantó en pie y empuñó la espada.

A este instante abatieron tienda, y con grandísimo ruido dejaron caer la
entena de alto abajo. Pensó Sancho que el cielo se desencajaba de sus
quicios y venía a dar sobre su cabeza; y, agobiándola, lleno de miedo, la
puso entre las piernas. No las tuvo todas consigo don Quijote; que también
se estremeció y encogió de hombros y perdió la color del rostro. La chusma
izó la entena con la misma priesa y ruido que la habían amainado, y todo
esto, callando, como si no tuvieran voz ni aliento. Hizo señal el cómitre
que zarpasen el ferro, y, saltando en mitad de la crujía con el corbacho o
rebenque, comenzó a mosquear las espaldas de la chusma, y a largarse poco a
poco a la mar. Cuando Sancho vio a una moverse tantos pies colorados, que
tales pensó él que eran los remos, dijo entre sí:

-Éstas sí son verdaderamente cosas encantadas, y no las que mi amo dice.
¿Qué han hecho estos desdichados, que ansí los azotan, y cómo este hombre
solo, que anda por aquí silbando, tiene atrevimiento para azotar a tanta
gente? Ahora yo digo que éste es infierno, o, por lo menos, el purgatorio.

Don Quijote, que vio la atención con que Sancho miraba lo que pasaba, le
dijo:

-¡Ah Sancho amigo, y con qué brevedad y cuán a poca costa os podíades vos,
si quisiésedes, desnudar de medio cuerpo arriba, y poneros entre estos
señores, y acabar con el desencanto de Dulcinea! Pues con la miseria y pena
de tantos, no sentiríades vos mucho la vuestra; y más, que podría ser que
el sabio Merlín tomase en cuenta cada azote déstos, por ser dados de buena
mano, por diez de los que vos finalmente os habéis de dar.

Preguntar quería el general qué azotes eran aquéllos, o qué desencanto de
Dulcinea, cuando dijo el marinero:

-Señal hace Monjuí de que hay bajel de remos en la costa por la banda del
poniente.

Esto oído, saltó el general en la crujía, y dijo:

-¡Ea hijos, no se nos vaya! Algún bergantín de cosarios de Argel debe de
ser éste que la atalaya nos señala.

Llegáronse luego las otras tres galeras a la capitana, a saber lo que se
les ordenaba. Mandó el general que las dos saliesen a la mar, y él con la
otra iría tierra a tierra, porque ansí el bajel no se les escaparía. Apretó
la chusma los remos, impeliendo las galeras con tanta furia, que parecía
que volaban. Las que salieron a la mar, a obra de dos millas descubrieron
un bajel, que con la vista le marcaron por de hasta catorce o quince
bancos, y así era la verdad; el cual bajel, cuando descubrió las galeras,
se puso en caza, con intención y esperanza de escaparse por su ligereza;
pero avínole mal, porque la galera capitana era de los más ligeros bajeles
que en la mar navegaban, y así le fue entrando, que claramente los del
bergantín conocieron que no podían escaparse; y así, el arráez quisiera que
dejaran los remos y se entregaran, por no irritar a enojo al capitán que
nuestras galeras regía. Pero la suerte, que de otra manera lo guiaba,
ordenó que, ya que la capitana llegaba tan cerca que podían los del bajel
oír las voces que desde ella les decían que se rindiesen, dos toraquís, que
es como decir dos turcos borrachos, que en el bergantín venían con estos
doce, dispararon dos escopetas, con que dieron muerte a dos soldados que
sobre nuestras arrumbadas venían. Viendo lo cual, juró el general de no
dejar con vida a todos cuantos en el bajel tomase, y, llegando a embestir
con toda furia, se le escapó por debajo de la palamenta. Pasó la galera
adelante un buen trecho; los del bajel se vieron perdidos, hicieron vela en
tanto que la galera volvía, y de nuevo, a vela y a remo, se pusieron en
caza; pero no les aprovechó su diligencia tanto como les dañó su
atrevimiento, porque, alcanzándoles la capitana a poco más de media milla,
les echó la palamenta encima y los cogió vivos a todos.

Llegaron en esto las otras dos galeras, y todas cuatro con la presa
volvieron a la playa, donde infinita gente los estaba esperando, deseosos
de ver lo que traían. Dio fondo el general cerca de tierra, y conoció que
estaba en la marina el virrey de la ciudad. Mandó echar el esquife para
traerle, y mandó amainar la entena para ahorcar luego luego al arráez y a
los demás turcos que en el bajel había cogido, que serían hasta treinta y
seis personas, todos gallardos, y los más, escopeteros turcos. Preguntó el
general quién era el arráez del bergantín y fuele respondido por uno de los
cautivos, en lengua castellana, que después pareció ser renegado español:

-Este mancebo, señor, que aquí vees es nuestro arráez.

Y mostróle uno de los más bellos y gallardos mozos que pudiera pintar la
humana imaginación. La edad, al parecer, no llegaba a veinte años.
Preguntóle el general:

-Dime, mal aconsejado perro, ¿quién te movió a matarme mis soldados, pues
veías ser imposible el escaparte? ¿Ese respeto se guarda a las capitanas?
¿No sabes tú que no es valentía la temeridad? Las esperanzas dudosas han de
hacer a los hombres atrevidos, pero no temerarios.

Responder quería el arráez; pero no pudo el general, por entonces, oír la
respuesta, por acudir a recebir al virrey, que ya entraba en la galera, con
el cual entraron algunos de sus criados y algunas personas del pueblo.

-¡Buena ha estado la caza, señor general! -dijo el virrey.

-Y tan buena -respondió el general- cual la verá Vuestra Excelencia agora
colgada de esta entena.

-¿Cómo ansí? -replicó el virrey.

-Porque me han muerto -respondió el general-, contra toda ley y contra toda
razón y usanza de guerra, dos soldados de los mejores que en estas galeras
venían, y yo he jurado de ahorcar a cuantos he cautivado, principalmente a
este mozo, que es el arráez del bergantín.

Y enseñóle al que ya tenía atadas las manos y echado el cordel a la
garganta, esperando la muerte.

Miróle el virrey, y, viéndole tan hermoso, y tan gallardo, y tan humilde,
dándole en aquel instante una carta de recomendación su hermosura, le vino
deseo de escusar su muerte; y así, le preguntó:

-Dime, arráez, ¿eres turco de nación, o moro, o renegado?

A lo cual el mozo respondió, en lengua asimesmo castellana:

-Ni soy turco de nación, ni moro, ni renegado.

-Pues, ¿qué eres? -replicó el virrey.

-Mujer cristiana -respondió el mancebo.

-¿Mujer y cristiana, y en tal traje y en tales pasos? Más es cosa para
admirarla que para creerla.

-Suspended -dijo el mozo-, ¡oh señores!, la ejecución de mi muerte, que no
se perderá mucho en que se dilate vuestra venganza en tanto que yo os
cuente mi vida.

¿Quién fuera el de corazón tan duro que con estas razones no se ablandara,
o, a lo menos, hasta oír las que el triste y lastimado mancebo decir
quería? El general le dijo que dijese lo que quisiese, pero que no esperase
alcanzar perdón de su conocida culpa. Con esta licencia, el mozo comenzó a
decir desta manera:

-«De aquella nación más desdichada que prudente, sobre quien ha llovido
estos días un mar de desgracias, nací yo, de moriscos padres engendrada. En
la corriente de su desventura fui yo por dos tíos míos llevada a Berbería,
sin que me aprovechase decir que era cristiana, como, en efecto, lo soy, y
no de las fingidas ni aparentes, sino de las verdaderas y católicas. No me
valió, con los que tenían a cargo nuestro miserable destierro, decir esta
verdad, ni mis tíos quisieron creerla; antes la tuvieron por mentira y por
invención para quedarme en la tierra donde había nacido, y así, por fuerza
más que por grado, me trujeron consigo. Tuve una madre cristiana y un padre
discreto y cristiano, ni más ni menos; mamé la fe católica en la leche;
criéme con buenas costumbres; ni en la lengua ni en ellas jamás, a mi
parecer, di señales de ser morisca. Al par y al paso destas virtudes, que
yo creo que lo son, creció mi hermosura, si es que tengo alguna; y, aunque
mi recato y mi encerramiento fue mucho, no debió de ser tanto que no
tuviese lugar de verme un mancebo caballero, llamado don Gaspar Gregorio,
hijo mayorazgo de un caballero que junto a nuestro lugar otro suyo tiene.
Cómo me vio, cómo nos hablamos, cómo se vio perdido por mí y cómo yo no muy
ganada por él, sería largo de contar, y más en tiempo que estoy temiendo
que, entre la lengua y la garganta, se ha de atravesar el riguroso cordel
que me amenaza; y así, sólo diré cómo en nuestro destierro quiso
acompañarme don Gregorio. Mezclóse con los moriscos que de otros lugares
salieron, porque sabía muy bien la lengua, y en el viaje se hizo amigo de
dos tíos míos que consigo me traían; porque mi padre, prudente y prevenido,
así como oyó el primer bando de nuestro destierro, se salió del lugar y se
fue a buscar alguno en los reinos estraños que nos acogiese. Dejó
encerradas y enterradas, en una parte de quien yo sola tengo noticia,
muchas perlas y piedras de gran valor, con algunos dineros en cruzados y
doblones de oro. Mandóme que no tocase al tesoro que dejaba en ninguna
manera, si acaso antes que él volviese nos desterraban. Hícelo así, y con
mis tíos, como tengo dicho, y otros parientes y allegados pasamos a
Berbería; y el lugar donde hicimos asiento fue en Argel, como si le
hiciéramos en el mismo infierno. Tuvo noticia el rey de mi hermosura, y la
fama se la dio de mis riquezas, que, en parte, fue ventura mía. Llamóme
ante sí, preguntóme de qué parte de España era y qué dineros y qué joyas
traía. Díjele el lugar, y que las joyas y dineros quedaban en él
enterrados, pero que con facilidad se podrían cobrar si yo misma volviese
por ellos. Todo esto le dije, temerosa de que no le cegase mi hermosura,
sino su codicia. Estando conmigo en estas pláticas, le llegaron a decir
cómo venía conmigo uno de los más gallardos y hermosos mancebos que se
podía imaginar. Luego entendí que lo decían por don Gaspar Gregorio, cuya
belleza se deja atrás las mayores que encarecer se pueden. Turbéme,
considerando el peligro que don Gregorio corría, porque entre aquellos
bárbaros turcos en más se tiene y estima un mochacho o mancebo hermoso que
una mujer, por bellísima que sea. Mandó luego el rey que se le trujesen
allí delante para verle, y preguntóme si era verdad lo que de aquel mozo le
decían. Entonces yo, casi como prevenida del cielo, le dije que sí era;
pero que le hacía saber que no era varón, sino mujer como yo, y que le
suplicaba me la dejase ir a vestir en su natural traje, para que de todo en
todo mostrase su belleza y con menos empacho pareciese ante su presencia.
Díjome que fuese en buena hora, y que otro día hablaríamos en el modo que
se podía tener para que yo volviese a España a sacar el escondido tesoro.
Hablé con don Gaspar, contéle el peligro que corría el mostrar ser hombre;
vestíle de mora, y aquella mesma tarde le truje a la presencia del rey, el
cual, en viéndole, quedó admirado y hizo disignio de guardarla para hacer
presente della al Gran Señor; y, por huir del peligro que en el serrallo de
sus mujeres podía tener y temer de sí mismo, la mandó poner en casa de unas
principales moras que la guardasen y la sirviesen, adonde le llevaron
luego. Lo que los dos sentimos (que no puedo negar que no le quiero) se
deje a la consideración de los que se apartan si bien se quieren. Dio luego
traza el rey de que yo volviese a España en este bergantín y que me
acompañasen dos turcos de nación, que fueron los que mataron vuestros
soldados. Vino también conmigo este renegado español -señalando al que
había hablado primero-, del cual sé yo bien que es cristiano encubierto y
que viene con más deseo de quedarse en España que de volver a Berbería; la
demás chusma del bergantín son moros y turcos, que no sirven de más que de
bogar al remo. Los dos turcos, codiciosos e insolentes, sin guardar el
orden que traíamos de que a mí y a este renegado en la primer parte de
España, en hábito de cristianos, de que venimos proveídos, nos echasen en
tierra, primero quisieron barrer esta costa y hacer alguna presa, si
pudiesen, temiendo que si primero nos echaban en tierra, por algún acidente
que a los dos nos sucediese, podríamos descubrir que quedaba el bergantín
en la mar, y si acaso hubiese galeras por esta costa, los tomasen. Anoche
descubrimos esta playa, y, sin tener noticia destas cuatro galeras,
fuimos descubiertos, y nos ha sucedido lo que habéis visto. En resolución:
don Gregorio queda en hábito de mujer entre mujeres, con manifiesto peligro
de perderse, y yo me veo atadas las manos, esperando, o, por mejor decir,
temiendo perder la vida, que ya me cansa.» Éste es, señores, el fin de mi
lamentable historia, tan verdadera como desdichada; lo que os ruego es que
me dejéis morir como cristiana, pues, como ya he dicho, en ninguna cosa he
sido culpante de la culpa en que los de mi nación han caído.

Y luego calló, preñados los ojos de tiernas lágrimas, a quien acompañaron
muchas de los que presentes estaban. El virrey, tierno y compasivo, sin
hablarle palabra, se llegó a ella y le quitó con sus manos el cordel que
las hermosas de la mora ligaba.

En tanto, pues, que la morisca cristiana su peregrina historia trataba,
tuvo clavados los ojos en ella un anciano peregrino que entró en la galera
cuando entró el virrey; y, apenas dio fin a su plática la morisca, cuando
él se arrojó a sus pies, y, abrazado dellos, con interrumpidas palabras de
mil sollozos y suspiros, le dijo:

-¡Oh Ana Félix, desdichada hija mía! Yo soy tu padre Ricote, que volvía a
buscarte por no poder vivir sin ti, que eres mi alma.

A cuyas palabras abrió los ojos Sancho, y alzó la cabeza (que inclinada
tenía, pensando en la desgracia de su paseo), y, mirando al peregrino,
conoció ser el mismo Ricote que topó el día que salió de su gobierno, y
confirmóse que aquélla era su hija, la cual, ya desatada, abrazó a su
padre, mezclando sus lágrimas con las suyas; el cual dijo al general y al
virrey:

-Ésta, señores, es mi hija, más desdichada en sus sucesos que en su nombre.
Ana Félix se llama, con el sobrenombre de Ricote, famosa tanto por su
hermosura como por mi riqueza. Yo salí de mi patria a buscar en reinos
estraños quien nos albergase y recogiese, y, habiéndole hallado en
Alemania, volví en este hábito de peregrino, en compañía de otros alemanes,
a buscar mi hija y a desenterrar muchas riquezas que dejé escondidas. No
hallé a mi hija; hallé el tesoro, que conmigo traigo, y agora, por el
estraño rodeo que habéis visto, he hallado el tesoro que más me enriquece,
que es a mi querida hija. Si nuestra poca culpa y sus lágrimas y las mías,
por la integridad de vuestra justicia, pueden abrir puertas a la
misericordia, usadla con nosotros, que jamás tuvimos pensamiento de
ofenderos, ni convenimos en ningún modo con la intención de los nuestros,
que justamente han sido desterrados.

Entonces dijo Sancho:

-Bien conozco a Ricote, y sé que es verdad lo que dice en cuanto a ser Ana
Félix su hija; que en esotras zarandajas de ir y venir, tener buena o mala
intención, no me entremeto.

Admirados del estraño caso todos los presentes, el general dijo:

-Una por una vuestras lágrimas no me dejarán cumplir mi juramento: vivid,
hermosa Ana Félix, los años de vida que os tiene determinados el cielo, y
lleven la pena de su culpa los insolentes y atrevidos que la cometieron.

Y mandó luego ahorcar de la entena a los dos turcos que a sus dos soldados
habían muerto; pero el virrey le pidió encarecidamente no los ahorcase,
pues más locura que valentía había sido la suya. Hizo el general lo que el
virrey le pedía, porque no se ejecutan bien las venganzas a sangre helada.
Procuraron luego dar traza de sacar a don Gaspar Gregorio del peligro en
que quedaba. Ofreció Ricote para ello más de dos mil ducados que en perlas
y en joyas tenía. Diéronse muchos medios, pero ninguno fue tal como el que
dio el renegado español que se ha dicho, el cual se ofreció de volver a
Argel en algún barco pequeño, de hasta seis bancos, armado de remeros
cristianos, porque él sabía dónde, cómo y cuándo podía y debía desembarcar,
y asimismo no ignoraba la casa donde don Gaspar quedaba. Dudaron el general
y el virrey el fiarse del renegado, ni confiar de los cristianos que habían
de bogar el remo; fióle Ana Félix, y Ricote, su padre, dijo que salía a dar
el rescate de los cristianos, si acaso se perdiesen.

Firmados, pues, en este parecer, se desembarcó el virrey, y don Antonio
Moreno se llevó consigo a la morisca y a su padre, encargándole el virrey
que los regalase y acariciase cuanto le fuese posible; que de su parte le
ofrecía lo que en su casa hubiese para su regalo. Tanta fue la benevolencia
y caridad que la hermosura de Ana Félix infundió en su pecho.





Capítulo LXIV. Que trata de la aventura que más pesadumbre dio a don
Quijote de cuantas hasta entonces le habían sucedido


La mujer de don Antonio Moreno cuenta la historia que recibió grandísimo
contento de ver a Ana Félix en su casa. Recibióla con mucho agrado, así
enamorada de su belleza como de su discreción, porque en lo uno y en lo
otro era estremada la morisca, y toda la gente de la ciudad, como a campana
tañida, venían a verla.

Dijo don Quijote a don Antonio que el parecer que habían tomado en la
libertad de don Gregorio no era bueno, porque tenía más de peligroso que de
conveniente, y que sería mejor que le pusiesen a él en Berbería con sus
armas y caballo; que él le sacaría a pesar de toda la morisma, como había
hecho don Gaiferos a su esposa Melisendra.

-Advierta vuesa merced -dijo Sancho, oyendo esto- que el señor don Gaiferos
sacó a sus esposa de tierra firme y la llevó a Francia por tierra firme;
pero aquí, si acaso sacamos a don Gregorio, no tenemos por dónde traerle a
España, pues está la mar en medio.

-Para todo hay remedio, si no es para la muerte -respondió don Quijote-;
pues, llegando el barco a la marina, nos podremos embarcar en él, aunque
todo el mundo lo impida.

-Muy bien lo pinta y facilita vuestra merced -dijo Sancho-, pero del dicho
al hecho hay gran trecho, y yo me atengo al renegado, que me parece muy
hombre de bien y de muy buenas entrañas.

Don Antonio dijo que si el renegado no saliese bien del caso, se tomaría el
espediente de que el gran don Quijote pasase en Berbería.

De allí a dos días partió el renegado en un ligero barco de seis remos por
banda, armado de valentísima chusma; y de allí a otros dos se partieron las
galeras a Levante, habiendo pedido el general al visorrey fuese servido de
avisarle de lo que sucediese en la libertad de don Gregorio y en el caso de
Ana Félix; quedó el visorrey de hacerlo así como se lo pedía.

Y una mañana, saliendo don Quijote a pasearse por la playa armado de todas
sus armas, porque, como muchas veces decía, ellas eran sus arreos, y su
descanso el pelear, y no se hallaba sin ellas un punto, vio venir hacía él
un caballero, armado asimismo de punta en blanco, que en el escudo traía
pintada una luna resplandeciente; el cual, llegándose a trecho que podía
ser oído, en altas voces, encaminando sus razones a don Quijote, dijo:

-Insigne caballero y jamás como se debe alabado don Quijote de la Mancha,
yo soy el Caballero de la Blanca Luna, cuyas inauditas hazañas quizá te le
habrán traído a la memoria. Vengo a contender contigo y a probar la fuerza
de tus brazos, en razón de hacerte conocer y confesar que mi dama, sea
quien fuere, es sin comparación más hermosa que tu Dulcinea del Toboso; la
cual verdad si tú la confiesas de llano en llano, escusarás tu muerte y el
trabajo que yo he de tomar en dártela; y si tú peleares y yo te venciere,
no quiero otra satisfación sino que, dejando las armas y absteniéndote de
buscar aventuras, te recojas y retires a tu lugar por tiempo de un año,
donde has de vivir sin echar mano a la espada, en paz tranquila y en
provechoso sosiego, porque así conviene al aumento de tu hacienda y a la
salvación de tu alma; y si tú me vencieres, quedará a tu discreción mi
cabeza, y serán tuyos los despojos de mis armas y caballo, y pasará a la
tuya la fama de mis hazañas. Mira lo que te está mejor, y respóndeme luego,
porque hoy todo el día traigo de término para despachar este negocio.

Don Quijote quedó suspenso y atónito, así de la arrogancia del Caballero de
la Blanca Luna como de la causa por que le desafiaba; y con reposo y ademán
severo le respondió:

-Caballero de la Blanca Luna, cuyas hazañas hasta agora no han llegado a mi
noticia, yo osaré jurar que jamás habéis visto a la ilustre Dulcinea; que
si visto la hubiérades, yo sé que procurárades no poneros en esta demanda,
porque su vista os desengañara de que no ha habido ni puede haber belleza
que con la suya comparar se pueda; y así, no diciéndoos que mentís, sino
que no acertáis en lo propuesto, con las condiciones que habéis referido,
aceto vuestro desafío, y luego, porque no se pase el día que traéis
determinado; y sólo exceto de las condiciones la de que se pase a mí la
fama de vuestras hazañas, porque no sé cuáles ni qué tales sean: con las
mías me contento, tales cuales ellas son. Tomad, pues, la parte del campo
que quisiéredes, que yo haré lo mesmo, y a quien Dios se la diere, San
Pedro se la bendiga.

Habían descubierto de la ciudad al Caballero de la Blanca Luna, y díchoselo
al visorrey que estaba hablando con don Quijote de la Mancha. El visorrey,
creyendo sería alguna nueva aventura fabricada por don Antonio Moreno, o
por otro algún caballero de la ciudad, salió luego a la playa con don
Antonio y con otros muchos caballeros que le acompañaban, a tiempo cuando
don Quijote volvía las riendas a Rocinante para tomar del campo lo
necesario.

Viendo, pues, el visorrey que daban los dos señales de volverse a
encontrar, se puso en medio, preguntándoles qué era la causa que les movía
a hacer tan de improviso batalla. El Caballero de la Blanca Luna respondió
que era precedencia de hermosura, y en breves razones le dijo las mismas
que había dicho a don Quijote, con la acetación de las condiciones del
desafío hechas por entrambas partes. Llegóse el visorrey a don Antonio, y
preguntóle paso si sabía quién era el tal Caballero de la Blanca Luna, o si
era alguna burla que querían hacer a don Quijote. Don Antonio le respondió
que ni sabía quién era, ni si era de burlas ni de veras el tal desafío.
Esta respuesta tuvo perplejo al visorrey en si les dejaría o no pasar
adelante en la batalla; pero, no pudiéndose persuadir a que fuese sino
burla, se apartó diciendo:

-Señores caballeros, si aquí no hay otro remedio sino confesar o morir, y
el señor don Quijote está en sus trece y vuestra merced el de la Blanca
Luna en sus catorce, a la mano de Dios, y dense.

Agradeció el de la Blanca Luna con corteses y discretas razones al visorrey
la licencia que se les daba, y don Quijote hizo lo mesmo; el cual,
encomendándose al cielo de todo corazón y a su Dulcinea -como tenía de
costumbre al comenzar de las batallas que se le ofrecían-, tornó a tomar
otro poco más del campo, porque vio que su contrario hacía lo mesmo, y, sin
tocar trompeta ni otro instrumento bélico que les diese señal de arremeter,
volvieron entrambos a un mesmo punto las riendas a sus caballos; y, como
era más ligero el de la Blanca Luna, llegó a don Quijote a dos tercios
andados de la carrera, y allí le encontró con tan poderosa fuerza, sin
tocarle con la lanza (que la levantó, al parecer, de propósito), que dio
con Rocinante y con don Quijote por el suelo una peligrosa caída. Fue luego
sobre él, y, poniéndole la lanza sobre la visera, le dijo:

-Vencido sois, caballero, y aun muerto, si no confesáis las condiciones de
nuestro desafío.

Don Quijote, molido y aturdido, sin alzarse la visera, como si hablara
dentro de una tumba, con voz debilitada y enferma, dijo:

-Dulcinea del Toboso es la más hermosa mujer del mundo, y yo el más
desdichado caballero de la tierra, y no es bien que mi flaqueza defraude
esta verdad. Aprieta, caballero, la lanza, y quítame la vida, pues me has
quitado la honra.

-Eso no haré yo, por cierto -dijo el de la Blanca Luna-: viva, viva en su
entereza la fama de la hermosura de la señora Dulcinea del Toboso, que sólo
me contento con que el gran don Quijote se retire a su lugar un año, o
hasta el tiempo que por mí le fuere mandado, como concertamos antes de
entrar en esta batalla.

Todo esto oyeron el visorrey y don Antonio, con otros muchos que allí
estaban, y oyeron asimismo que don Quijote respondió que como no le pidiese
cosa que fuese en perjuicio de Dulcinea, todo lo demás cumpliría como
caballero puntual y verdadero.

Hecha esta confesión, volvió las riendas el de la Blanca Luna, y, haciendo
mesura con la cabeza al visorrey, a medio galope se entró en la ciudad.

Mandó el visorrey a don Antonio que fuese tras él, y que en todas maneras
supiese quién era. Levantaron a don Quijote, descubriéronle el rostro y
halláronle sin color y trasudando. Rocinante, de puro malparado, no se pudo
mover por entonces. Sancho, todo triste, todo apesarado, no sabía qué
decirse ni qué hacerse: parecíale que todo aquel suceso pasaba en sueños y
que toda aquella máquina era cosa de encantamento. Veía a su señor rendido
y obligado a no tomar armas en un año; imaginaba la luz de la gloria de sus
hazañas escurecida, las esperanzas de sus nuevas promesas deshechas, como
se deshace el humo con el viento. Temía si quedaría o no contrecho
Rocinante, o deslocado su amo; que no fuera poca ventura si deslocado
quedara. Finalmente, con una silla de manos, que mandó traer el visorrey,
le llevaron a la ciudad, y el visorrey se volvió también a ella, con deseo
de saber quién fuese el Caballero de la Blanca Luna, que de tan mal talante
había dejado a don Quijote.





Capítulo LXV. Donde se da noticia quién era el de la Blanca Luna, con la
libertad de Don Gregorio, y de otros sucesos


Siguió don Antonio Moreno al Caballero de la Blanca Luna, y siguiéronle
también, y aun persiguiéronle, muchos muchachos, hasta que le cerraron en
un mesón dentro de la ciudad. Entró el don Antonio con deseo de conocerle;
salió un escudero a recebirle y a desarmarle; encerróse en una sala baja, y
con él don Antonio, que no se le cocía el pan hasta saber quién fuese.
Viendo, pues, el de la Blanca Luna que aquel caballero no le dejaba, le
dijo:

-Bien sé, señor, a lo que venís, que es a saber quién soy; y, porque no hay
para qué negároslo, en tanto que este mi criado me desarma os lo diré, sin
faltar un punto a la verdad del caso. Sabed, señor, que a mí me llaman el
bachiller Sansón Carrasco; soy del mesmo lugar de don Quijote de la Mancha,
cuya locura y sandez mueve a que le tengamos lástima todos cuantos le
conocemos, y entre los que más se la han tenido he sido yo; y, creyendo que
está su salud en su reposo y en que se esté en su tierra y en su casa, di
traza para hacerle estar en ella; y así, habrá tres meses que le salí al
camino como caballero andante, llamándome el Caballero de los Espejos, con
intención de pelear con él y vencerle, sin hacerle daño, poniendo por
condición de nuestra pelea que el vencido quedase a discreción del
vencedor; y lo que yo pensaba pedirle, porque ya le juzgaba por vencido,
era que se volviese a su lugar y que no saliese dél en todo un año, en el
cual tiempo podría ser curado; pero la suerte lo ordenó de otra manera,
porque él me venció a mí y me derribó del caballo, y así, no tuvo efecto mi
pensamiento: él prosiguió su camino, y yo me volví, vencido, corrido y
molido de la caída, que fue además peligrosa; pero no por esto se me quitó
el deseo de volver a buscarle y a vencerle, como hoy se ha visto. Y como él
es tan puntual en guardar las órdenes de la andante caballería, sin duda
alguna guardará la que le he dado, en cumplimiento de su palabra. Esto es,
señor, lo que pasa, sin que tenga que deciros otra cosa alguna; suplícoos
no me descubráis ni le digáis a don Quijote quién soy, porque tengan efecto
los buenos pensamientos míos y vuelva a cobrar su juicio un hombre que le
tiene bonísimo, como le dejen las sandeces de la caballería.

-¡Oh señor -dijo don Antonio-, Dios os perdone el agravio que habéis hecho
a todo el mundo en querer volver cuerdo al más gracioso loco que hay en él!
¿No veis, señor, que no podrá llegar el provecho que cause la cordura de
don Quijote a lo que llega el gusto que da con sus desvaríos? Pero yo
imagino que toda la industria del señor bachiller no ha de ser parte para
volver cuerdo a un hombre tan rematadamente loco; y si no fuese contra
caridad, diría que nunca sane don Quijote, porque con su salud, no
solamente perdemos sus gracias, sino las de Sancho Panza, su escudero, que
cualquiera dellas puede volver a alegrar a la misma melancolía. Con todo
esto, callaré, y no le diré nada, por ver si salgo verdadero en sospechar
que no ha de tener efecto la diligencia hecha por el señor Carrasco.

El cual respondió que ya una por una estaba en buen punto aquel negocio, de
quien esperaba feliz suceso. Y, habiéndose ofrecido don Antonio de hacer lo
que más le mandase, se despidió dél; y, hecho liar sus armas sobre un
macho, luego al mismo punto, sobre el caballo con que entró en la batalla,
se salió de la ciudad aquel mismo día y se volvió a su patria, sin
sucederle cosa que obligue a contarla en esta verdadera historia.

Contó don Antonio al visorrey todo lo que Carrasco le había contado, de lo
que el visorrey no recibió mucho gusto, porque en el recogimiento de don
Quijote se perdía el que podían tener todos aquellos que de sus locuras
tuviesen noticia.

Seis días estuvo don Quijote en el lecho, marrido, triste, pensativo y mal
acondicionado, yendo y viniendo con la imaginación en el desdichado suceso
de su vencimiento. Consolábale Sancho, y, entre otras razones, le dijo:

-Señor mío, alce vuestra merced la cabeza y alégrese, si puede, y dé
gracias al cielo que, ya que le derribó en la tierra, no salió con alguna
costilla quebrada; y, pues sabe que donde las dan las toman, y que no
siempre hay tocinos donde hay estacas, dé una higa al médico, pues no le ha
menester para que le cure en esta enfermedad: volvámonos a nuestra casa y
dejémonos de andar buscando aventuras por tierras y lugares que no sabemos;
y, si bien se considera, yo soy aquí el más perdidoso, aunque es vuestra
merced el más mal parado. Yo, que dejé con el gobierno los deseos de ser
más gobernador, no dejé la gana de ser conde, que jamás tendrá efecto si
vuesa merced deja de ser rey, dejando el ejercicio de su caballería; y así,
vienen a volverse en humo mis esperanzas.

-Calla, Sancho, pues ves que mi reclusión y retirada no ha de pasar de un
año; que luego volveré a mis honrados ejercicios, y no me ha de faltar
reino que gane y algún condado que darte.

-Dios lo oiga -dijo Sancho-, y el pecado sea sordo, que siempre he oído
decir que más vale buena esperanza que ruin posesión.

En esto estaban cuando entró don Antonio, diciendo con muestras de
grandísimo contento:

-¡Albricias, señor don Quijote, que don Gregorio y el renegado que fue por
él está en la playa! ¿Qué digo en la playa? Ya está en casa del visorrey, y
será aquí al momento.

Alegróse algún tanto don Quijote, y dijo:

-En verdad que estoy por decir que me holgara que hubiera sucedido todo al
revés, porque me obligara a pasar en Berbería, donde con la fuerza de mi
brazo diera libertad no sólo a don Gregorio, sino a cuantos cristianos
cautivos hay en Berbería. Pero, ¿qué digo, miserable? ¿No soy yo el
vencido? ¿No soy yo el derribado? ¿No soy yo el que no puede tomar arma en
un año? Pues, ¿qué prometo? ¿De qué me alabo, si antes me conviene usar de
la rueca que de la espada?

-Déjese deso, señor -dijo Sancho-: viva la gallina, aunque con su pepita,
que hoy por ti y mañana por mí; y en estas cosas de encuentros y porrazos
no hay tomarles tiento alguno, pues el que hoy cae puede levantarse
mañana, si no es que se quiere estar en la cama; quiero decir que se deje
desmayar, sin cobrar nuevos bríos para nuevas pendencias. Y levántese
vuestra merced agora para recebir a don Gregorio, que me parece que anda la
gente alborotada, y ya debe de estar en casa.

Y así era la verdad; porque, habiendo ya dado cuenta don Gregorio y el
renegado al visorrey de su ida y vuelta, deseoso don Gregorio de ver a Ana
Félix, vino con el renegado a casa de don Antonio; y, aunque don Gregorio,
cuando le sacaron de Argel, fue con hábitos de mujer, en el barco los trocó
por los de un cautivo que salió consigo; pero en cualquiera que viniera,
mostrara ser persona para ser codiciada, servida y estimada, porque era
hermoso sobremanera, y la edad, al parecer, de diez y siete o diez y ocho
años. Ricote y su hija salieron a recebirle: el padre con lágrimas y la
hija con honestidad. No se abrazaron unos a otros, porque donde hay mucho
amor no suele haber demasiada desenvoltura. Las dos bellezas juntas de don
Gregorio y Ana Félix admiraron en particular a todos juntos los que
presentes estaban. El silencio fue allí el que habló por los dos amantes, y
los ojos fueron las lenguas que descubrieron sus alegres y honestos
pensamientos.

Contó el renegado la industria y medio que tuvo para sacar a don Gregorio;
contó don Gregorio los peligros y aprietos en que se había visto con las
mujeres con quien había quedado, no con largo razonamiento, sino con breves
palabras, donde mostró que su discreción se adelantaba a sus años.
Finalmente, Ricote pagó y satisfizo liberalmente así al renegado como a los
que habían bogado al remo. Reincorporóse y redújose el renegado con la
Iglesia, y, de miembro podrido, volvió limpio y sano con la penitencia y el
arrepentimiento.

De allí a dos días trató el visorrey con don Antonio qué modo tendrían para
que Ana Félix y su padre quedasen en España, pareciéndoles no ser de
inconveniente alguno que quedasen en ella hija tan cristiana y padre, al
parecer, tan bien intencionado. Don Antonio se ofreció venir a la corte a
negociarlo, donde había de venir forzosamente a otros negocios, dando a
entender que en ella, por medio del favor y de las dádivas, muchas cosas
dificultosas se acaban.

-No -dijo Ricote, que se halló presente a esta plática- hay que esperar en
favores ni en dádivas, porque con el gran don Bernardino de Velasco, conde
de Salazar, a quien dio Su Majestad cargo de nuestra expulsión, no valen
ruegos, no promesas, no dádivas, no lástimas; porque, aunque es verdad que
él mezcla la misericordia con la justicia, como él vee que todo el cuerpo
de nuestra nación está contaminado y podrido, usa con él antes del cauterio
que abrasa que del ungüento que molifica; y así, con prudencia, con
sagacidad, con diligencia y con miedos que pone, ha llevado sobre sus
fuertes hombros a debida ejecución el peso desta gran máquina, sin que
nuestras industrias, estratagemas, solicitudes y fraudes hayan podido
deslumbrar sus ojos de Argos, que contino tiene alerta, porque no se le
quede ni encubra ninguno de los nuestros, que, como raíz escondida, que con
el tiempo venga después a brotar, y a echar frutos venenosos en España, ya
limpia, ya desembarazada de los temores en que nuestra muchedumbre la
tenía. ¡Heroica resolución del gran Filipo Tercero, y inaudita prudencia en
haberla encargado al tal don Bernardino de Velasco!

-Una por una, yo haré, puesto allá, las diligencias posibles, y haga el
cielo lo que más fuere servido -dijo don Antonio-. Don Gregorio se irá
conmigo a consolar la pena que sus padres deben tener por su ausencia; Ana
Félix se quedará con mi mujer en mi casa, o en un monasterio, y yo sé que
el señor visorrey gustará se quede en la suya el buen Ricote, hasta ver
cómo yo negocio.

El visorrey consintió en todo lo propuesto, pero don Gregorio, sabiendo lo
que pasaba, dijo que en ninguna manera podía ni quería dejar a doña Ana
Félix; pero, teniendo intención de ver a sus padres, y de dar traza de
volver por ella, vino en el decretado concierto. Quedóse Ana Félix con la
mujer de don Antonio, y Ricote en casa del visorrey.

Llegóse el día de la partida de don Antonio, y el de don Quijote y Sancho,
que fue de allí a otros dos; que la caída no le concedió que más presto se
pusiese en camino. Hubo lágrimas, hubo suspiros, desmayos y sollozos al
despedirse don Gregorio de Ana Félix. Ofrecióle Ricote a don Gregorio mil
escudos, si los quería; pero él no tomó ninguno, sino solos cinco que le
prestó don Antonio, prometiendo la paga dellos en la corte. Con esto, se
partieron los dos, y don Quijote y Sancho después, como se ha dicho: don
Quijote desarmado y de camino, Sancho a pie, por ir el rucio cargado con
las armas.





Capítulo LXVI. Que trata de lo que verá el que lo leyere, o lo oirá el que
lo escuchare leer


Al salir de Barcelona, volvió don Quijote a mirar el sitio donde había
caído, y dijo:

-¡Aquí fue Troya! ¡Aquí mi desdicha, y no mi cobardía, se llevó mis
alcanzadas glorias; aquí usó la fortuna conmigo de sus vueltas y revueltas;
aquí se escurecieron mis hazañas; aquí, finalmente, cayó mi ventura para
jamás levantarse!

Oyendo lo cual Sancho, dijo:

-Tan de valientes corazones es, señor mío, tener sufrimiento en las
desgracias como alegría en las prosperidades; y esto lo juzgo por mí mismo,
que si cuando era gobernador estaba alegre, agora que soy escudero de a
pie, no estoy triste; porque he oído decir que esta que llaman por ahí
Fortuna es una mujer borracha y antojadiza, y, sobre todo, ciega, y así, no
vee lo que hace, ni sabe a quién derriba, ni a quién ensalza.

-Muy filósofo estás, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, muy a lo discreto
hablas: no sé quién te lo enseña. Lo que te sé decir es que no hay fortuna
en el mundo, ni las cosas que en él suceden, buenas o malas que sean,
vienen acaso, sino por particular providencia de los cielos, y de aquí
viene lo que suele decirse: que cada uno es artífice de su ventura. Yo lo
he sido de la mía, pero no con la prudencia necesaria, y así, me han salido
al gallarín mis presunciones; pues debiera pensar que al poderoso grandor
del caballo del de la Blanca Luna no podía resistir la flaqueza de
Rocinante. Atrevíme en fin, hice lo que puede, derribáronme, y, aunque
perdí la honra, no perdí, ni puedo perder, la virtud de cumplir mi palabra.
Cuando era caballero andante, atrevido y valiente, con mis obras y con mis
manos acreditaba mis hechos; y agora, cuando soy escudero pedestre,
acreditaré mis palabras cumpliendo la que di de mi promesa. Camina, pues,
amigo Sancho, y vamos a tener en nuestra tierra el año del noviciado, con
cuyo encerramiento cobraremos virtud nueva para volver al nunca de mí
olvidado ejercicio de las armas.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, no es cosa tan gustosa el caminar a pie, que me
mueva e incite a hacer grandes jornadas. Dejemos estas armas colgadas de
algún árbol, en lugar de un ahorcado, y, ocupando yo las espaldas del
rucio, levantados los pies del suelo, haremos las jornadas como vuestra
merced las pidiere y midiere; que pensar que tengo de caminar a pie y
hacerlas grandes es pensar en lo escusado.

-Bien has dicho, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-: cuélguense mis armas por
trofeo, y al pie dellas, o alrededor dellas, grabaremos en los árboles lo
que en el trofeo de las armas de Roldán estaba escrito:

Nadie las mueva

que estar no pueda con Roldán a prueba.

-Todo eso me parece de perlas -respondió Sancho-; y, si no fuera por la
falta que para el camino nos había de hacer Rocinante, también fuera bien
dejarle colgado.

-¡Pues ni él ni las armas -replicó don Quijote- quiero que se ahorquen,
porque no se diga que a buen servicio, mal galardón!

-Muy bien dice vuestra merced -respondió Sancho-, porque, según opinión de
discretos, la culpa del asno no se ha de echar a la albarda; y, pues deste
suceso vuestra merced tiene la culpa, castíguese a sí mesmo, y no revienten
sus iras por las ya rotas y sangrientas armas, ni por las mansedumbres de
Rocinante, ni por la blandura de mis pies, queriendo que caminen más de lo
justo.

En estas razones y pláticas se les pasó todo aquel día, y aun otros cuatro,
sin sucederles cosa que estorbase su camino; y al quinto día, a la entrada
de un lugar, hallaron a la puerta de un mesón mucha gente, que, por ser
fiesta, se estaba allí solazando. Cuando llegaba a ellos don Quijote, un
labrador alzó la voz diciendo:

-Alguno destos dos señores que aquí vienen, que no conocen las partes, dirá
lo que se ha de hacer en nuestra apuesta.

-Sí diré, por cierto -respondió don Quijote-, con toda rectitud, si es que
alcanzo a entenderla.

-«Es, pues, el caso -dijo el labrador-, señor bueno, que un vecino deste
lugar, tan gordo que pesa once arrobas, desafió a correr a otro su vecino,
que no pesa más que cinco. Fue la condición que habían de correr una
carrera de cien pasos con pesos iguales; y, habiéndole preguntado al
desafiador cómo se había de igualar el peso, dijo que el desafiado, que
pesa cinco arrobas, se pusiese seis de hierro a cuestas, y así se
igualarían las once arrobas del flaco con las once del gordo.»

-Eso no -dijo a esta sazón Sancho, antes que don Quijote respondiese-. Y a
mí, que ha pocos días que salí de ser gobernador y juez, como todo el mundo
sabe, toca averiguar estas dudas y dar parecer en todo pleito.

-Responde en buen hora -dijo don Quijote-, Sancho amigo, que yo no estoy
para dar migas a un gato, según traigo alborotado y trastornado el juicio.

Con esta licencia, dijo Sancho a los labradores, que estaban muchos
alrededor dél la boca abierta, esperando la sentencia de la suya:

-Hermanos, lo que el gordo pide no lleva camino, ni tiene sombra de
justicia alguna; porque si es verdad lo que se dice, que el desafiado puede
escoger las armas, no es bien que éste las escoja tales que le impidan ni
estorben el salir vencedor; y así, es mi parecer que el gordo desafiador se
escamonde, monde, entresaque, pula y atilde, y saque seis arrobas de sus
carnes, de aquí o de allí de su cuerpo, como mejor le pareciere y
estuviere; y desta manera, quedando en cinco arrobas de peso, se igualará y
ajustará con las cinco de su contrario, y así podrán correr igualmente.

-¡Voto a tal -dijo un labrador que escuchó la sentencia de Sancho- que este
señor ha hablado como un bendito y sentenciado como un canónigo! Pero a
buen seguro que no ha de querer quitarse el gordo una onza de sus carnes,
cuanto más seis arrobas.

-Lo mejor es que no corran -respondió otro-, porque el flaco no se muela
con el peso, ni el gordo se descarne; y échese la mitad de la apuesta en
vino, y llevemos estos señores a la taberna de lo caro, y sobre mí la capa
cuando llueva.

-Yo, señores -respondió don Quijote-, os lo agradezco, pero no puedo
detenerme un punto, porque pensamientos y sucesos tristes me hacen parecer
descortés y caminar más que de paso.

Y así, dando de las espuelas a Rocinante, pasó adelante, dejándolos
admirados de haber visto y notado así su estraña figura como la discreción
de su criado, que por tal juzgaron a Sancho. Y otro de los labradores dijo:

-Si el criado es tan discreto, ¡cuál debe de ser el amo! Yo apostaré que si
van a estudiar a Salamanca, que a un tris han de venir a ser alcaldes de
corte; que todo es burla, sino estudiar y más estudiar, y tener favor y
ventura; y cuando menos se piensa el hombre, se halla con una vara en la
mano o con una mitra en la cabeza.

Aquella noche la pasaron amo y mozo en mitad del campo, al cielo raso y
descubierto; y otro día, siguiendo su camino, vieron que hacia ellos venía
un hombre de a pie, con unas alforjas al cuello y una azcona o chuzo en la
mano, propio talle de correo de a pie; el cual, como llegó junto a don
Quijote, adelantó el paso, y medio corriendo llegó a él, y, abrazándole por
el muslo derecho, que no alcanzaba a más, le dijo, con muestras de mucha
alegría:

-¡Oh mi señor don Quijote de la Mancha, y qué gran contento ha de llegar al
corazón de mi señor el duque cuando sepa que vuestra merced vuelve a su
castillo, que todavía se está en él con mi señora la duquesa!

-No os conozco, amigo -respondió don Quijote-, ni sé quién sois, si vos no
me lo decís.

-Yo, señor don Quijote -respondió el correo-, soy Tosilos, el lacayo del
duque mi señor, que no quise pelear con vuestra merced sobre el casamiento
de la hija de doña Rodríguez.

-¡Válame Dios! -dijo don Quijote-. ¿Es posible que sois vos el que los
encantadores mis enemigos transformaron en ese lacayo que decís, por
defraudarme de la honra de aquella batalla?

-Calle, señor bueno -replicó el cartero-, que no hubo encanto alguno ni
mudanza de rostro ninguna: tan lacayo Tosilos entré en la estacada como
Tosilos lacayo salí della. Yo pensé casarme sin pelear, por haberme
parecido bien la moza, pero sucedióme al revés mi pensamiento, pues, así
como vuestra merced se partió de nuestro castillo, el duque mi señor me
hizo dar cien palos por haber contravenido a las ordenanzas que me tenía
dadas antes de entrar en la batalla, y todo ha parado en que la muchacha es
ya monja, y doña Rodríguez se ha vuelto a Castilla, y yo voy ahora a
Barcelona, a llevar un pliego de cartas al virrey, que le envía mi amo. Si
vuestra merced quiere un traguito, aunque caliente, puro, aquí llevo una
calabaza llena de lo caro, con no sé cuántas rajitas de queso de Tronchón,
que servirán de llamativo y despertador de la sed, si acaso está durmiendo.

-Quiero el envite -dijo Sancho-, y échese el resto de la cortesía, y
escancie el buen Tosilos, a despecho y pesar de cuantos encantadores hay en
las Indias.

-En fin -dijo don Quijote-, tú eres, Sancho, el mayor glotón del mundo y el
mayor ignorante de la tierra, pues no te persuades que este correo es
encantado, y este Tosilos contrahecho. Quédate con él y hártate, que yo me
iré adelante poco a poco, esperándote a que vengas.

Rióse el lacayo, desenvainó su calabaza, desalforjó sus rajas, y, sacando
un panecillo, él y Sancho se sentaron sobre la yerba verde, y en buena paz
compaña despabilaron y dieron fondo con todo el repuesto de las alforjas,
con tan buenos alientos, que lamieron el pliego de las cartas, sólo porque
olía a queso. Dijo Tosilos a Sancho:

-Sin duda este tu amo, Sancho amigo, debe de ser un loco.

-¿Cómo debe? -respondió Sancho-. No debe nada a nadie, que todo lo paga, y
más cuando la moneda es locura. Bien lo veo yo, y bien se lo digo a él;
pero, ¿qué aprovecha? Y más agora que va rematado, porque va vencido del
Caballero de la Blanca Luna.

Rogóle Tosilos le contase lo que le había sucedido, pero Sancho le
respondió que era descortesía dejar que su amo le esperase; que otro día,
si se encontrasen, habría lugar par ello. Y, levantándose, después de
haberse sacudido el sayo y las migajas de las barbas, antecogió al rucio,
y, diciendo ''a Dios'', dejó a Tosilos y alcanzó a su amo, que a la sombra
de un árbol le estaba esperando.





Capítulo LXVII. De la resolución que tomó don Quijote de hacerse pastor y
seguir la vida del campo, en tanto que se pasaba el año de su promesa, con
otros sucesos en verdad gustosos y buenos


Si muchos pensamientos fatigaban a don Quijote antes de ser derribado,
muchos más le fatigaron después de caído. A la sombra del árbol estaba,
como se ha dicho, y allí, como moscas a la miel, le acudían y picaban
pensamientos: unos iban al desencanto de Dulcinea y otros a la vida que
había de hacer en su forzosa retirada. Llegó Sancho y alabóle la liberal
condición del lacayo Tosilos.

-¿Es posible -le dijo don Quijote- que todavía, ¡oh Sancho!, pienses que
aquél sea verdadero lacayo? Parece que se te ha ido de las mientes haber
visto a Dulcinea convertida y transformada en labradora, y al Caballero de
los Espejos en el bachiller Carrasco, obras todas de los encantadores que
me persiguen. Pero dime agora: ¿preguntaste a ese Tosilos que dices qué ha
hecho Dios de Altisidora: si ha llorado mi ausencia, o si ha dejado ya en
las manos del olvido los enamorados pensamientos que en mi presencia la
fatigaban?

-No eran -respondió Sancho- los que yo tenía tales que me diesen lugar a
preguntar boberías. ¡Cuerpo de mí!, señor, ¿está vuestra merced ahora en
términos de inquirir pensamientos ajenos, especialmente amorosos?

-Mira, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, mucha diferencia hay de las obras que se
hacen por amor a las que se hacen por agradecimiento. Bien puede ser que un
caballero sea desamorado, pero no puede ser, hablando en todo rigor, que
sea desagradecido. Quísome bien, al parecer, Altisidora; diome los tres
tocadores que sabes, lloró en mi partida, maldíjome, vituperóme, quejóse, a
despecho de la vergüenza, públicamente: señales todas de que me adoraba,
que las iras de los amantes suelen parar en maldiciones. Yo no tuve
esperanzas que darle, ni tesoros que ofrecerle, porque las mías las tengo
entregadas a Dulcinea, y los tesoros de los caballeros andantes son, como
los de los duendes, aparentes y falsos, y sólo puedo darle estos acuerdos
que della tengo, sin perjuicio, pero, de los que tengo de Dulcinea, a quien
tú agravias con la remisión que tienes en azotarte y en castigar esas
carnes, que vea yo comidas de lobos, que quieren guardarse antes para los
gusanos que para el remedio de aquella pobre señora.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, si va a decir la verdad, yo no me puedo
persuadir que los azotes de mis posaderas tengan que ver con los
desencantos de los encantados, que es como si dijésemos: "Si os duele la
cabeza, untaos las rodillas". A lo menos, yo osaré jurar que en cuantas
historias vuesa merced ha leído que tratan de la andante caballería no ha
visto algún desencantado por azotes; pero, por sí o por no, yo me los daré,
cuando tenga gana y el tiempo me dé comodidad para castigarme.

-Dios lo haga -respondió don Quijote-, y los cielos te den gracia para que
caigas en la cuenta y en la obligación que te corre de ayudar a mi señora,
que lo es tuya, pues tú eres mío.

En estas pláticas iban siguiendo su camino, cuando llegaron al mesmo sitio
y lugar donde fueron atropellados de los toros. Reconocióle don Quijote;
dijo a Sancho:

-Éste es el prado donde topamos a las bizarras pastoras y gallardos
pastores que en él querían renovar e imitar a la pastoral Arcadia,
pensamiento tan nuevo como discreto, a cuya imitación, si es que a ti te
parece bien, querría, ¡oh Sancho!, que nos convirtiésemos en pastores,
siquiera el tiempo que tengo de estar recogido. Yo compraré algunas ovejas,
y todas las demás cosas que al pastoral ejercicio son necesarias, y
llamándome yo el pastor Quijotiz, y tú el pastor Pancino, nos andaremos por
los montes, por las selvas y por los prados, cantando aquí, endechando
allí, bebiendo de los líquidos cristales de las fuentes, o ya de los
limpios arroyuelos, o de los caudalosos ríos. Daránnos con abundantísima
mano de su dulcísimo fruto las encinas, asiento los troncos de los
durísimos alcornoques, sombra los sauces, olor las rosas, alfombras de mil
colores matizadas los estendidos prados, aliento el aire claro y puro, luz
la luna y las estrellas, a pesar de la escuridad de la noche, gusto el
canto, alegría el lloro, Apolo versos, el amor conceptos, con que podremos
hacernos eternos y famosos, no sólo en los presentes, sino en los venideros
siglos.

-Pardiez -dijo Sancho-, que me ha cuadrado, y aun esquinado, tal género de
vida; y más, que no la ha de haber aún bien visto el bachiller Sansón
Carrasco y maese Nicolás el barbero, cuando la han de querer seguir, y
hacerse pastores con nosotros; y aun quiera Dios no le venga en voluntad al
cura de entrar también en el aprisco, según es de alegre y amigo de
holgarse.

-Tú has dicho muy bien -dijo don Quijote-; y podrá llamarse el bachiller
Sansón Carrasco, si entra en el pastoral gremio, como entrará sin duda, el
pastor Sansonino, o ya el pastor Carrascón; el barbero Nicolás se podrá
llamar Miculoso, como ya el antiguo Boscán se llamó Nemoroso; al cura no sé
qué nombre le pongamos, si no es algún derivativo de su nombre, llamándole
el pastor Curiambro. Las pastoras de quien hemos de ser amantes, como entre
peras podremos escoger sus nombres; y, pues el de mi señora cuadra así al
de pastora como al de princesa, no hay para qué cansarme en buscar otro que
mejor le venga; tú, Sancho, pondrás a la tuya el que quisieres.

-No pienso -respondió Sancho- ponerle otro alguno sino el de Teresona, que
le vendrá bien con su gordura y con el propio que tiene, pues se llama
Teresa; y más, que, celebrándola yo en mis versos, vengo a descubrir mis
castos deseos, pues no ando a buscar pan de trastrigo por las casas ajenas.
El cura no será bien que tenga pastora, por dar buen ejemplo; y si quisiere
el bachiller tenerla, su alma en su palma.

-¡Válame Dios -dijo don Quijote-, y qué vida nos hemos de dar, Sancho
amigo! ¡Qué de churumbelas han de llegar a nuestros oídos, qué de gaitas
zamoranas, qué tamborines, y qué de sonajas, y qué de rabeles! Pues, ¡qué
si destas diferencias de músicas resuena la de los albogues! Allí se verá
casi todos los instrumentos pastorales.

-¿Qué son albogues -preguntó Sancho-, que ni los he oído nombrar, ni los he
visto en toda mi vida?

-Albogues son -respondió don Quijote- unas chapas a modo de candeleros de
azófar, que, dando una con otra por lo vacío y hueco, hace un son, si no
muy agradable ni armónico, no descontenta, y viene bien con la rusticidad
de la gaita y del tamborín; y este nombre albogues es morisco, como lo son
todos aquellos que en nuestra lengua castellana comienzan en al, conviene a
saber: almohaza, almorzar, alhombra, alguacil, alhucema, almacén, alcancía,
y otros semejantes, que deben ser pocos más; y solos tres tiene nuestra
lengua que son moriscos y acaban en i, y son: borceguí, zaquizamí y
maravedí. Alhelí y alfaquí, tanto por el al primero como por el i en que
acaban, son conocidos por arábigos. Esto te he dicho, de paso, por
habérmelo reducido a la memoria la ocasión de haber nombrado albogues; y
hanos de ayudar mucho al parecer en perfeción este ejercicio el ser yo
algún tanto poeta, como tú sabes, y el serlo también en estremo el
bachiller Sansón Carrasco. Del cura no digo nada; pero yo apostaré que debe
de tener sus puntas y collares de poeta; y que las tenga también maese
Nicolás, no dudo en ello, porque todos, o los más, son guitarristas y
copleros. Yo me quejaré de ausencia; tú te alabarás de firme enamorado; el
pastor Carrascón, de desdeñado; y el cura Curiambro, de lo que él más puede
servirse, y así, andará la cosa que no haya más que desear.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Yo soy, señor, tan desgraciado que temo no ha de llegar el día en que en
tal ejercicio me vea. ¡Oh, qué polidas cuchares tengo de hacer cuando
pastor me vea! ¡Qué de migas, qué de natas, qué de guirnaldas y qué de
zarandajas pastoriles, que, puesto que no me granjeen fama de discreto, no
dejarán de granjearme la de ingenioso! Sanchica mi hija nos llevará la
comida al hato. Pero, ¡guarda!, que es de buen parecer, y hay pastores más
maliciosos que simples, y no querría que fuese por lana y volviese
trasquilada; y también suelen andar los amores y los no buenos deseos por
los campos como por las ciudades, y por las pastorales chozas como por los
reales palacios, y, quitada la causa se quita el pecado; y ojos que no
veen, corazón que no quiebra; y más vale salto de mata que ruego de hombres
buenos.

-No más refranes, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, pues cualquiera de los que has
dicho basta para dar a entender tu pensamiento; y muchas veces te he
aconsejado que no seas tan pródigo en refranes y que te vayas a la mano en
decirlos; pero paréceme que es predicar en desierto, y "castígame mi madre,
y yo trómpogelas".

-Paréceme -respondió Sancho- que vuesa merced es como lo que dicen: "Dijo
la sartén a la caldera: Quítate allá ojinegra". Estáme reprehendiendo que
no diga yo refranes, y ensártalos vuesa merced de dos en dos.

-Mira, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-: yo traigo los refranes a propósito,
y vienen cuando los digo como anillo en el dedo; pero tráeslos tan por los
cabellos, que los arrastras, y no los guías; y si no me acuerdo mal, otra
vez te he dicho que los refranes son sentencias breves, sacadas de la
experiencia y especulación de nuestros antiguos sabios; y el refrán que no
viene a propósito, antes es disparate que sentencia. Pero dejémonos desto,
y, pues ya viene la noche, retirémonos del camino real algún trecho, donde
pasaremos esta noche, y Dios sabe lo que será mañana.

Retiráronse, cenaron tarde y mal, bien contra la voluntad de Sancho, a
quien se le representaban las estrechezas de la andante caballería usadas
en las selvas y en los montes, si bien tal vez la abundancia se mostraba en
los castillos y casas, así de don Diego de Miranda como en las bodas del
rico Camacho, y de don Antonio Moreno; pero consideraba no ser posible ser
siempre de día ni siempre de noche, y así, pasó aquélla durmiendo, y su amo
velando.





Capítulo LXVIII. De la cerdosa aventura que le aconteció a don Quijote


Era la noche algo escura, puesto que la luna estaba en el cielo, pero no en
parte que pudiese ser vista: que tal vez la señora Diana se va a pasear a
los antípodas, y deja los montes negros y los valles escuros. Cumplió don
Quijote con la naturaleza durmiendo el primer sueño, sin dar lugar al
segundo; bien al revés de Sancho, que nunca tuvo segundo, porque le duraba
el sueño desde la noche hasta la mañana, en que se mostraba su buena
complexión y pocos cuidados. Los de don Quijote le desvelaron de manera que
despertó a Sancho y le dijo:

-Maravillado estoy, Sancho, de la libertad de tu condición: yo imagino que
eres hecho de mármol, o de duro bronce, en quien no cabe movimiento ni
sentimiento alguno. Yo velo cuando tú duermes, yo lloro cuando cantas, yo
me desmayo de ayuno cuanto tú estás perezoso y desalentado de puro harto.
De buenos criados es conllevar las penas de sus señores y sentir sus
sentimientos, por el bien parecer siquiera. Mira la serenidad desta noche,
la soledad en que estamos, que nos convida a entremeter alguna vigilia
entre nuestro sueño. Levántate, por tu vida, y desvíate algún trecho de
aquí, y con buen ánimo y denuedo agradecido date trecientos o cuatrocientos
azotes a buena cuenta de los del desencanto de Dulcinea; y esto rogando te
lo suplico, que no quiero venir contigo a los brazos, como la otra vez,
porque sé que los tienes pesados. Después que te hayas dado, pasaremos lo
que resta de la noche cantando, yo mi ausencia y tú tu firmeza, dando desde
agora principio al ejercicio pastoral que hemos de tener en nuestra aldea.

-Señor -respondió Sancho-, no soy yo religioso para que desde la mitad de
mi sueño me levante y me dicipline, ni menos me parece que del estremo del
dolor de los azotes se pueda pasar al de la música. Vuesa merced me deje
dormir y no me apriete en lo del azotarme; que me hará hacer juramento de
no tocarme jamás al pelo del sayo, no que al de mis carnes.

-¡Oh alma endurecida! ¡Oh escudero sin piedad! ¡Oh pan mal empleado y
mercedes mal consideradas las que te he hecho y pienso de hacerte! Por mí
te has visto gobernador, y por mí te vees con esperanzas propincuas de ser
conde, o tener otro título equivalente, y no tardará el cumplimiento de
ellas más de cuanto tarde en pasar este año; que yo post tenebras spero
lucem.

-No entiendo eso -replico Sancho-; sólo entiendo que, en tanto que duermo,
ni tengo temor, ni esperanza, ni trabajo ni gloria; y bien haya el que
inventó el sueño, capa que cubre todos los humanos pensamientos, manjar que
quita la hambre, agua que ahuyenta la sed, fuego que calienta el frío, frío
que templa el ardor, y, finalmente, moneda general con que todas las cosas
se compran, balanza y peso que iguala al pastor con el rey y al simple con
el discreto. Sola una cosa tiene mala el sueño, según he oído decir, y es
que se parece a la muerte, pues de un dormido a un muerto hay muy poca
diferencia.

-Nunca te he oído hablar, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, tan elegantemente como
ahora, por donde vengo a conocer ser verdad el refrán que tú algunas veces
sueles decir: "No con quien naces, sino con quien paces".

-¡Ah, pesia tal -replicó Sancho-, señor nuestro amo! No soy yo ahora el que
ensarta refranes, que también a vuestra merced se le caen de la boca de dos
en dos mejor que a mí, sino que debe de haber entre los míos y los suyos
esta diferencia: que los de vuestra merced vendrán a tiempo y los míos a
deshora; pero, en efecto, todos son refranes.

En esto estaban, cuando sintieron un sordo estruendo y un áspero ruido, que
por todos aquellos valles se estendía. Levantóse en pie don Quijote y puso
mano a la espada, y Sancho se agazapó debajo del rucio, poniéndose a los
lados el lío de las armas, y la albarda de su jumento, tan temblando de
miedo como alborotado don Quijote. De punto en punto iba creciendo el
ruido, y, llegándose cerca a los dos temerosos; a lo menos, al uno, que al
otro, ya se sabe su valentía.

Es, pues, el caso que llevaban unos hombres a vender a una feria más de
seiscientos puercos, con los cuales caminaban a aquellas horas, y era tanto
el ruido que llevaban y el gruñir y el bufar, que ensordecieron los oídos
de don Quijote y de Sancho, que no advirtieron lo que ser podía. Llegó de
tropel la estendida y gruñidora piara, y, sin tener respeto a la autoridad
de don Quijote, ni a la de Sancho, pasaron por cima de los dos, deshaciendo
las trincheas de Sancho, y derribando no sólo a don Quijote, sino llevando
por añadidura a Rocinante. El tropel, el gruñir, la presteza con que
llegaron los animales inmundos, puso en confusión y por el suelo a la
albarda, a las armas, al rucio, a Rocinante, a Sancho y a don Quijote.

Levantóse Sancho como mejor pudo, y pidió a su amo la espada, diciéndole
que quería matar media docena de aquellos señores y descomedidos puercos,
que ya había conocido que lo eran. Don Quijote le dijo:

-Déjalos estar, amigo, que esta afrenta es pena de mi pecado, y justo
castigo del cielo es que a un caballero andante vencido le coman adivas, y
le piquen avispas y le hollen puercos.

-También debe de ser castigo del cielo -respondió Sancho- que a los
escuderos de los caballeros vencidos los puncen moscas, los coman piojos y
les embista la hambre. Si los escuderos fuéramos hijos de los caballeros a
quien servimos, o parientes suyos muy cercanos, no fuera mucho que nos
alcanzara la pena de sus culpas hasta la cuarta generación; pero, ¿qué
tienen que ver los Panzas con los Quijotes? Ahora bien: tornémonos a
acomodar y durmamos lo poco que queda de la noche, y amanecerá Dios y
medraremos.

-Duerme tú, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, que naciste para dormir; que
yo, que nací para velar, en el tiempo que falta de aquí al día, daré rienda
a mis pensamientos, y los desfogaré en un madrigalete, que, sin que tú lo
sepas, anoche compuse en la memoria.

-A mí me parece -respondió Sancho- que los pensamientos que dan lugar a
hacer coplas no deben de ser muchos. Vuesa merced coplee cuanto quisiere,
que yo dormiré cuanto pudiere.

Y luego, tomando en el suelo cuanto quiso, se acurrucó y durmió a sueño
suelto, sin que fianzas, ni deudas, ni dolor alguno se lo estorbase. Don
Quijote, arrimado a un tronco de una haya o de un alcornoque -que Cide
Hamete Benengeli no distingue el árbol que era-, al son de sus mesmos
suspiros, cantó de esta suerte:

   -Amor, cuando yo pienso
   en el mal que me das, terrible y fuerte,
   voy corriendo a la muerte,
   pensando así acabar mi mal inmenso;
   mas, en llegando al paso
   que es puerto en este mar de mi tormento,
   tanta alegría siento,
   que la vida se esfuerza y no le paso.
   Así el vivir me mata,
   que la muerte me torna a dar la vida.
   ¡Oh condición no oída,
   la que conmigo muerte y vida trata!

Cada verso déstos acompañaba con muchos suspiros y no pocas lágrimas, bien
como aquél cuyo corazón tenía traspasado con el dolor del vencimiento y con
la ausencia de Dulcinea.

Llegóse en esto el día, dio el sol con sus rayos en los ojos a Sancho,
despertó y esperezóse, sacudiéndose y estirándose los perezosos miembros;
miró el destrozo que habían hecho los puercos en su repostería, y maldijo
la piara y aun más adelante. Finalmente, volvieron los dos a su comenzado
camino, y al declinar de la tarde vieron que hacia ellos venían hasta diez
hombres de a caballo y cuatro o cinco de a pie. Sobresaltóse el corazón
de don Quijote y azoróse el de Sancho, porque la gente que se les llegaba
traía lanzas y adargas y venía muy a punto de guerra. Volvióse don Quijote
a Sancho, y díjole:

-Si yo pudiera, Sancho, ejercitar mis armas, y mi promesa no me hubiera
atado los brazos, esta máquina que sobre nosotros viene la tuviera yo por
tortas y pan pintado, pero podría ser fuese otra cosa de la que tememos.

Llegaron, en esto, los de a caballo, y arbolando las lanzas, sin hablar
palabra alguna rodearon a don Quijote y se las pusieron a las espaldas y
pechos, amenazándole de muerte. Uno de los de a pie, puesto un dedo en la
boca, en señal de que callase, asió del freno de Rocinante y le sacó del
camino; y los demás de a pie, antecogiendo a Sancho y al rucio, guardando
todos maravilloso silencio, siguieron los pasos del que llevaba a don
Quijote, el cual dos o tres veces quiso preguntar adónde le llevaban o qué
querían; pero, apenas comenzaba a mover los labios, cuando se los iban a
cerrar con los hierros de las lanzas; y a Sancho le acontecía lo mismo,
porque, apenas daba muestras de hablar, cuando uno de los de a pie, con un
aguijón, le punzaba, y al rucio ni más ni menos como si hablar quisiera.
Cerró la noche, apresuraron el paso, creció en los dos presos el miedo, y
más cuando oyeron que de cuando en cuando les decían:

-¡Caminad, trogloditas!

-¡Callad, bárbaros!

-¡Pagad, antropófagos!

-¡No os quejéis, scitas, ni abráis los ojos, Polifemos matadores, leones
carniceros!

Y otros nombres semejantes a éstos, con que atormentaban los oídos de los
miserables amo y mozo. Sancho iba diciendo entre sí:

-¿Nosotros tortolitas? ¿Nosotros barberos ni estropajos? ¿Nosotros
perritas, a quien dicen cita, cita? No me contentan nada estos nombres: a
mal viento va esta parva; todo el mal nos viene junto, como al perro los
palos, y ¡ojalá parase en ellos lo que amenaza esta aventura tan
desventurada!

Iba don Quijote embelesado, sin poder atinar con cuantos discursos hacía
qué serían aquellos nombres llenos de vituperios que les ponían, de los
cuales sacaba en limpio no esperar ningún bien y temer mucho mal. Llegaron,
en esto, un hora casi de la noche, a un castillo, que bien conoció don
Quijote que era el del duque, donde había poco que habían estado.

-¡Váleme Dios! -dijo, así como conoció la estancia- y ¿qué será esto? Sí
que en esta casa todo es cortesía y buen comedimiento, pero para los
vencidos el bien se vuelve en mal y el mal en peor.

Entraron al patio principal del castillo, y viéronle aderezado y puesto de
manera que les acrecentó la admiración y les dobló el miedo, como se verá
en el siguiente capítulo.





Capítulo LXIX. Del más raro y más nuevo suceso que en todo el discurso
desta grande historia avino a don Quijote


Apeáronse los de a caballo, y, junto con los de a pie, tomando en peso y
arrebatadamente a Sancho y a don Quijote, los entraron en el patio,
alrededor del cual ardían casi cien hachas, puestas en sus blandones, y,
por los corredores del patio, más de quinientas luminarias; de modo que, a
pesar de la noche, que se mostraba algo escura, no se echaba de ver la
falta del día. En medio del patio se levantaba un túmulo como dos varas del
suelo, cubierto todo con un grandísimo dosel de terciopelo negro, alrededor
del cual, por sus gradas, ardían velas de cera blanca sobre más de cien
candeleros de plata; encima del cual túmulo se mostraba un cuerpo muerto de
una tan hermosa doncella, que hacía parecer con su hermosura hermosa a la
misma muerte. Tenía la cabeza sobre una almohada de brocado, coronada con
una guirnalda de diversas y odoríferas flores tejida, las manos cruzadas
sobre el pecho, y, entre ellas, un ramo de amarilla y vencedora palma.

A un lado del patio estaba puesto un teatro, y en dos sillas sentados dos
personajes, que, por tener coronas en la cabeza y ceptros en las manos,
daban señales de ser algunos reyes, ya verdaderos o ya fingidos. Al lado
deste teatro, adonde se subía por algunas gradas, estaban otras dos sillas,
sobre las cuales los que trujeron los presos sentaron a don Quijote y a
Sancho, todo esto callando y dándoles a entender con señales a los dos que
asimismo callasen; pero, sin que se lo señalaran, callaron ellos, porque la
admiración de lo que estaban mirando les tenía atadas las lenguas.

Subieron, en esto, al teatro, con mucho acompañamiento, dos principales
personajes, que luego fueron conocidos de don Quijote ser el duque y la
duquesa, sus huéspedes, los cuales se sentaron en dos riquísimas sillas,
junto a los dos que parecían reyes. ¿Quién no se había de admirar con esto,
añadiéndose a ello haber conocido don Quijote que el cuerpo muerto que
estaba sobre el túmulo era el de la hermosa Altisidora?

Al subir el duque y la duquesa en el teatro, se levantaron don Quijote y
Sancho y les hicieron una profunda humillación, y los duques hicieron lo
mesmo, inclinando algún tanto las cabezas.

Salió, en esto, de través un ministro, y, llegándose a Sancho, le echó una
ropa de bocací negro encima, toda pintada con llamas de fuego, y,
quitándole la caperuza, le puso en la cabeza una coroza, al modo de las que
sacan los penitenciados por el Santo Oficio; y díjole al oído que no
descosiese los labios, porque le echarían una mordaza, o le quitarían la
vida. Mirábase Sancho de arriba abajo, veíase ardiendo en llamas, pero como
no le quemaban, no las estimaba en dos ardites. Quitóse la coroza, viola
pintada de diablos, volviósela a poner, diciendo entre sí:

-Aún bien, que ni ellas me abrasan ni ellos me llevan.

Mirábale también don Quijote, y, aunque el temor le tenía suspensos los
sentidos, no dejó de reírse de ver la figura de Sancho. Comenzó, en esto, a
salir, al parecer, debajo del túmulo un son sumiso y agradable de flautas,
que, por no ser impedido de alguna humana voz, porque en aquel sitio el
mesmo silencio guardaba silencio a sí mismo, se mostraba blando y amoroso.
Luego hizo de sí improvisa muestra, junto a la almohada del, al parecer,
cadáver, un hermoso mancebo vestido a lo romano, que, al son de una arpa,
que él mismo tocaba, cantó con suavísima y clara voz estas dos estancias:

   -En tanto que en sí vuelve Altisidora,
   muerta por la crueldad de don Quijote,
   y en tanto que en la corte encantadora
   se vistieren las damas de picote,
   y en tanto que a sus dueñas mi señora
   vistiere de bayeta y de anascote,
   cantaré su belleza y su desgracia,
   con mejor plectro que el cantor de Tracia.
   Y aun no se me figura que me toca
   aqueste oficio solamente en vida;
   mas, con la lengua muerta y fría en la boca,
   pienso mover la voz a ti debida.
   Libre mi alma de su estrecha roca,
   por el estigio lago conducida,
   celebrándote irá, y aquel sonido
   hará parar las aguas del olvido.

-No más -dijo a esta sazón uno de los dos que parecían reyes-: no más,
cantor divino; que sería proceder en infinito representarnos ahora la
muerte y las gracias de la sin par Altisidora, no muerta, como el mundo
ignorante piensa, sino viva en las lenguas de la Fama, y en la pena que
para volverla a la perdida luz ha de pasar Sancho Panza, que está presente;
y así, ¡oh tú, Radamanto, que conmigo juzgas en las cavernas lóbregas de
Lite!, pues sabes todo aquello que en los inescrutables hados está
determinado acerca de volver en sí esta doncella, dilo y decláralo luego,
porque no se nos dilate el bien que con su nueva vuelta esperamos.

Apenas hubo dicho esto Minos, juez y compañero de Radamanto, cuando,
levantándose en pie Radamanto, dijo:

-¡Ea, ministros de esta casa, altos y bajos, grandes y chicos, acudid unos
tras otros y sellad el rostro de Sancho con veinte y cuatro mamonas, y doce
pellizcos y seis alfilerazos en brazos y lomos, que en esta ceremonia
consiste la salud de Altisidora!

Oyendo lo cual Sancho Panza, rompió el silencio, y dijo:

-¡Voto a tal, así me deje yo sellar el rostro ni manosearme la cara como
volverme moro! ¡Cuerpo de mí! ¿Qué tiene que ver manosearme el rostro con
la resurreción desta doncella? Regostóse la vieja a los bledos. Encantan a
Dulcinea, y azótanme para que se desencante; muérese Altisidora de males
que Dios quiso darle, y hanla de resucitar hacerme a mí veinte y cuatro
mamonas, y acribarme el cuerpo a alfilerazos y acardenalarme los brazos a
pellizcos. ¡Esas burlas, a un cuñado, que yo soy perro viejo, y no hay
conmigo tus, tus!

-¡Morirás! -dijo en alta voz Radamanto-. Ablándate, tigre; humíllate,
Nembrot soberbio, y sufre y calla, pues no te piden imposibles. Y no te
metas en averiguar las dificultades deste negocio: mamonado has de ser,
acrebillado te has de ver, pellizcado has de gemir. ¡Ea, digo, ministros,
cumplid mi mandamiento; si no, por la fe de hombre de bien, que habéis de
ver para lo que nacistes!

Parecieron, en esto, que por el patio venían, hasta seis dueñas en
procesión, una tras otra, las cuatro con antojos, y todas levantadas las
manos derechas en alto, con cuatro dedos de muñecas de fuera, para hacer
las manos más largas, como ahora se usa. No las hubo visto Sancho, cuando,
bramando como un toro, dijo:

-Bien podré yo dejarme manosear de todo el mundo, pero consentir que me
toquen dueñas, ¡eso no! Gatéenme el rostro, como hicieron a mi amo en este
mesmo castillo; traspásenme el cuerpo con puntas de dagas buidas;
atenácenme los brazos con tenazas de fuego, que yo lo llevaré en paciencia,
o serviré a estos señores; pero que me toquen dueñas no lo consentiré, si
me llevase el diablo.

Rompió también el silencio don Quijote, diciendo a Sancho:

-Ten paciencia, hijo, y da gusto a estos señores, y muchas gracias al cielo
por haber puesto tal virtud en tu persona, que con el martirio della
desencantes los encantados y resucites los muertos.

Ya estaban las dueñas cerca de Sancho, cuando él, más blando y más
persuadido, poniéndose bien en la silla, dio rostro y barba a la primera,
la cual la hizo una mamona muy bien sellada, y luego una gran reverencia.

-¡Menos cortesía; menos mudas, señora dueña -dijo Sancho-; que por Dios que
traéis las manos oliendo a vinagrillo!

Finalmente, todas las dueñas le sellaron, y otra mucha gente de casa le
pellizcaron; pero lo que él no pudo sufrir fue el punzamiento de los
alfileres; y así, se levantó de la silla, al parecer mohíno, y, asiendo de
una hacha encendida que junto a él estaba, dio tras las dueñas, y tras
todos su verdugos, diciendo:

-¡Afuera, ministros infernales, que no soy yo de bronce, para no sentir tan
extraordinarios martirios!

En esto, Altisidora, que debía de estar cansada por haber estado tanto
tiempo supina, se volvió de un lado; visto lo cual por los circunstantes,
casi todos a una voz dijeron:

-¡Viva es Altisidora! ¡Altisidora vive!

Mandó Radamanto a Sancho que depusiese la ira, pues ya se había alcanzado
el intento que se procuraba.

Así como don Quijote vio rebullir a Altisidora, se fue a poner de rodillas
delante de Sancho, diciéndole:

-Agora es tiempo, hijo de mis entrañas, no que escudero mío, que te des
algunos de los azotes que estás obligado a dar por el desencanto de
Dulcinea. Ahora, digo, que es el tiempo donde tienes sazonada la virtud, y
con eficacia de obrar el bien que de ti se espera.

A lo que respondió Sancho:

-Esto me parece argado sobre argado, y no miel sobre hojuelas. Bueno sería
que tras pellizcos, mamonas y alfilerazos viniesen ahora los azotes. No
tienen más que hacer sino tomar una gran piedra, y atármela al cuello, y
dar conmigo en un pozo, de lo que a mí no pesaría mucho, si es que para
curar los males ajenos tengo yo de ser la vaca de la boda. Déjenme; si no,
por Dios que lo arroje y lo eche todo a trece, aunque no se venda.

Ya en esto, se había sentado en el túmulo Altisidora, y al mismo instante
sonaron las chirimías, a quien acompañaron las flautas y las voces de
todos, que aclamaban:

-¡Viva Altisidora! ¡Altisidora viva!

Levantáronse los duques y los reyes Minos y Radamanto, y todos juntos, con
don Quijote y Sancho, fueron a recebir a Altisidora y a bajarla del túmulo;
la cual, haciendo de la desmayada, se inclinó a los duques y a los reyes,
y, mirando de través a don Quijote, le dijo:

-Dios te lo perdone, desamorado caballero, pues por tu crueldad he estado
en el otro mundo, a mi parecer, más de mil años; y a ti, ¡oh el más
compasivo escudero que contiene el orbe!, te agradezco la vida que poseo.
Dispón desde hoy más, amigo Sancho, de seis camisas mías que te mando para
que hagas otras seis para ti; y, si no son todas sanas, a lo menos son
todas limpias.

Besóle por ello las manos Sancho, con la coroza en la mano y las rodillas
en el suelo. Mandó el duque que se la quitasen, y le volviesen su caperuza,
y le pusiesen el sayo, y le quitasen la ropa de las llamas. Suplicó Sancho
al duque que le dejasen la ropa y mitra, que las quería llevar a su tierra,
por señal y memoria de aquel nunca visto suceso. La duquesa respondió que
sí dejarían, que ya sabía él cuán grande amiga suya era. Mandó el duque
despejar el patio, y que todos se recogiesen a sus estancias, y que a don
Quijote y a Sancho los llevasen a las que ellos ya se sabían.





Capítulo LXX. Que sigue al de sesenta y nueve, y trata de cosas no
escusadas para la claridad desta historia


Durmió Sancho aquella noche en una carriola, en el mesmo aposento de don
Quijote, cosa que él quisiera escusarla, si pudiera, porque bien sabía que
su amo no le había de dejar dormir a preguntas y a respuestas, y no se
hallaba en disposición de hablar mucho, porque los dolores de los martirios
pasados los tenía presentes, y no le dejaban libre la lengua, y viniérale
más a cuento dormir en una choza solo, que no en aquella rica estancia
acompañado. Salióle su temor tan verdadero y su sospecha tan cierta, que,
apenas hubo entrado su señor en el lecho, cuando dijo:

-¿Qué te parece, Sancho, del suceso desta noche? Grande y poderosa es la
fuerza del desdén desamorado, como por tus mismos ojos has visto muerta a
Altisidora, no con otras saetas, ni con otra espada, ni con otro
instrumento bélico, ni con venenos mortíferos, sino con la consideración
del rigor y el desdén con que yo siempre la he tratado.

-Muriérase ella en hora buena cuanto quisiera y como quisiera -respondió
Sancho-, y dejárame a mí en mi casa, pues ni yo la enamoré ni la desdeñé en
mi vida. Yo no sé ni puedo pensar cómo sea que la salud de Altisidora,
doncella más antojadiza que discreta, tenga que ver, como otra vez he
dicho, con los martirios de Sancho Panza. Agora sí que vengo a conocer
clara y distintamente que hay encantadores y encantos en el mundo, de quien
Dios me libre, pues yo no me sé librar; con todo esto, suplico a vuestra
merced me deje dormir y no me pregunte más, si no quiere que me arroje por
una ventana abajo.

-Duerme, Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, si es que te dan lugar los
alfilerazos y pellizcos recebidos, y las mamonas hechas.

-Ningún dolor -replicó Sancho- llegó a la afrenta de las mamonas, no por
otra cosa que por habérmelas hecho dueña, que confundidas sean; y torno a
suplicar a vuesa merced me deje dormir, porque el sueño es alivio de las
miserias de los que las tienen despiertas.

Sea así -dijo don Quijote-, y Dios te acompañe.

Durmiéronse los dos, y en este tiempo quiso escribir y dar cuenta Cide
Hamete, autor desta grande historia, qué les movió a los duques a levantar
el edificio de la máquina referida. Y dice que, no habiéndosele olvidado al
bachiller Sansón Carrasco cuando el Caballero de los Espejos fue vencido y
derribado por don Quijote, cuyo vencimiento y caída borró y deshizo todos
sus designios, quiso volver a probar la mano, esperando mejor suceso que el
pasado; y así, informándose del paje que llevó la carta y presente a Teresa
Panza, mujer de Sancho, adónde don Quijote quedaba, buscó nuevas armas y
caballo, y puso en el escudo la blanca luna, llevándolo todo sobre un
macho, a quien guiaba un labrador, y no Tomé Cecial, su antiguo escudero,
porque no fuese conocido de Sancho ni de don Quijote.

Llegó, pues, al castillo del duque, que le informó el camino y derrota que
don Quijote llevaba, con intento de hallarse en las justas de Zaragoza.
Díjole asimismo las burlas que le había hecho con la traza del desencanto
de Dulcinea, que había de ser a costa de las posaderas de Sancho. En fin,
dio cuenta de la burla que Sancho había hecho a su amo, dándole a entender
que Dulcinea estaba encantada y transformada en labradora, y cómo la
duquesa su mujer había dado a entender a Sancho que él era el que se
engañaba, porque verdaderamente estaba encantada Dulcinea; de que no poco
se rió y admiró el bachiller, considerando la agudeza y simplicidad de
Sancho, como del estremo de la locura de don Quijote.

Pidióle el duque que si le hallase, y le venciese o no, se volviese por
allí a darle cuenta del suceso. Hízolo así el bachiller; partióse en su
busca, no le halló en Zaragoza, pasó adelante y sucedióle lo que queda
referido.

Volvióse por el castillo del duque y contóselo todo, con las condiciones de
la batalla, y que ya don Quijote volvía a cumplir, como buen caballero
andante, la palabra de retirarse un año en su aldea, en el cual tiempo
podía ser, dijo el bachiller, que sanase de su locura; que ésta era la
intención que le había movido a hacer aquellas transformaciones, por ser
cosa de lástima que un hidalgo tan bien entendido como don Quijote fuese
loco. Con esto, se despidió del duque, y se volvió a su lugar, esperando en
él a don Quijote, que tras él venía.

De aquí tomó ocasión el duque de hacerle aquella burla: tanto era lo que
gustaba de las cosas de Sancho y de don Quijote; y haciendo tomar los
caminos cerca y lejos del castillo por todas las partes que imaginó que
podría volver don Quijote, con muchos criados suyos de a pie y de a
caballo, para que por fuerza o de grado le trujesen al castillo, si le
hallasen. Halláronle, dieron aviso al duque, el cual, ya prevenido de todo
lo que había de hacer, así como tuvo noticia de su llegada, mandó encender
las hachas y las luminarias del patio y poner a Altisidora sobre el túmulo,
con todos los aparatos que se han contado, tan al vivo, y tan bien hechos,
que de la verdad a ellos había bien poca diferencia.

Y dice más Cide Hamete: que tiene para sí ser tan locos los burladores como
los burlados, y que no estaban los duques dos dedos de parecer tontos, pues
tanto ahínco ponían en burlarse de dos tontos.

Los cuales, el uno durmiendo a sueño suelto, y el otro velando a
pensamientos desatados, les tomó el día y la gana de levantarse; que las
ociosas plumas, ni vencido ni vencedor, jamás dieron gusto a don Quijote.

Altisidora -en la opinión de don Quijote, vuelta de muerte a vida-,
siguiendo el humor de sus señores, coronada con la misma guirnalda que en
el túmulo tenía, y vestida una tunicela de tafetán blanco, sembrada de
flores de oro, y sueltos los cabellos por las espaldas, arrimada a un
báculo de negro y finísimo ébano, entró en el aposento de don Quijote, con
cuya presencia turbado y confuso, se encogió y cubrió casi todo con las
sábanas y colchas de la cama, muda la lengua, sin que acertase a hacerle
cortesía ninguna. Sentóse Altisidora en una silla, junto a su cabecera, y,
después de haber dado un gran suspiro, con voz tierna y debilitada le dijo:

-Cuando las mujeres principales y las recatadas doncellas atropellan por la
honra, y dan licencia a la lengua que rompa por todo inconveniente, dando
noticia en público de los secretos que su corazón encierra, en estrecho
término se hallan. Yo, señor don Quijote de la Mancha, soy una déstas,
apretada, vencida y enamorada; pero, con todo esto, sufrida y honesta;
tanto que, por serlo tanto, reventó mi alma por mi silencio y perdí la
vida. Dos días ha que con la consideración del rigor con que me has
tratado,

¡Oh más duro que mármol a mis quejas,

empedernido caballero!, he estado muerta, o, a lo menos, juzgada por tal de
los que me han visto; y si no fuera porque el Amor, condoliéndose de mí,
depositó mi remedio en los martirios deste buen escudero, allá me quedara
en el otro mundo.

-Bien pudiera el Amor -dijo Sancho- depositarlos en los de mi asno, que yo
se lo agradeciera. Pero dígame, señora, así el cielo la acomode con otro
más blando amante que mi amo: ¿qué es lo que vio en el otro mundo? ¿Qué hay
en el infierno? Porque quien muere desesperado, por fuerza ha de tener
aquel paradero.

-La verdad que os diga -respondió Altisidora-, yo no debí de morir del
todo, pues no entré en el infierno; que, si allá entrara, una por una no
pudiera salir dél, aunque quisiera. La verdad es que llegué a la puerta,
adonde estaban jugando hasta una docena de diablos a la pelota, todos en
calzas y en jubón, con valonas guarnecidas con puntas de randas flamencas,
y con unas vueltas de lo mismo, que les servían de puños, con cuatro dedos
de brazo de fuera, porque pareciesen las manos más largas, en las cuales
tenían unas palas de fuego; y lo que más me admiró fue que les servían, en
lugar de pelotas, libros, al parecer, llenos de viento y de borra, cosa
maravillosa y nueva; pero esto no me admiró tanto como el ver que, siendo
natural de los jugadores el alegrarse los gananciosos y entristecerse los
que pierden, allí en aquel juego todos gruñían, todos regañaban y todos se
maldecían.

-Eso no es maravilla -respondió Sancho-, porque los diablos, jueguen o no
jueguen, nunca pueden estar contentos, ganen o no ganen.

-Así debe de ser -respondió Altisidora-; mas hay otra cosa que también me
admira, quiero decir me admiró entonces, y fue que al primer voleo no
quedaba pelota en pie, ni de provecho para servir otra vez; y así,
menudeaban libros nuevos y viejos, que era una maravilla. A uno dellos,
nuevo, flamante y bien encuadernado, le dieron un papirotazo que le sacaron
las tripas y le esparcieron las hojas. Dijo un diablo a otro: ''Mirad qué
libro es ése''. Y el diablo le respondió: ''Ésta es la Segunda parte de la
historia de don Quijote de la Mancha, no compuesta por Cide Hamete, su
primer autor, sino por un aragonés, que él dice ser natural de
Tordesillas''. ''Quitádmele de ahí -respondió el otro diablo-, y metedle en
los abismos del infierno: no le vean más mis ojos''. ''¿Tan malo es?'',
respondió el otro. ''Tan malo -replicó el primero-, que si de propósito yo
mismo me pusiera a hacerle peor, no acertara''. Prosiguieron su juego,
peloteando otros libros, y yo, por haber oído nombrar a don Quijote, a
quien tanto adamo y quiero, procuré que se me quedase en la memoria esta
visión.

-Visión debió de ser, sin duda -dijo don Quijote-, porque no hay otro yo en
el mundo, y ya esa historia anda por acá de mano en mano, pero no para en
ninguna, porque todos la dan del pie. Yo no me he alterado en oír que ando
como cuerpo fantástico por las tinieblas del abismo, ni por la claridad de
la tierra, porque no soy aquel de quien esa historia trata. Si ella fuere
buena, fiel y verdadera, tendrá siglos de vida; pero si fuere mala, de su
parto a la sepultura no será muy largo el camino.

Iba Altisidora a proseguir en quejarse de don Quijote, cuando le dijo don
Quijote:

-Muchas veces os he dicho, señora, que a mí me pesa de que hayáis colocado
en mí vuestros pensamientos, pues de los míos antes pueden ser agradecidos
que remediados; yo nací para ser de Dulcinea del Toboso, y los hados, si
los hubiera, me dedicaron para ella; y pensar que otra alguna hermosura ha
de ocupar el lugar que en mi alma tiene es pensar lo imposible. Suficiente
desengaño es éste para que os retiréis en los límites de vuestra
honestidad, pues nadie se puede obligar a lo imposible.

Oyendo lo cual Altisidora, mostrando enojarse y alterarse, le dijo:

-¡Vive el Señor, don bacallao, alma de almirez, cuesco de dátil, más terco
y duro que villano rogado cuando tiene la suya sobre el hito, que si
arremeto a vos, que os tengo de sacar los ojos! ¿Pensáis por ventura, don
vencido y don molido a palos, que yo me he muerto por vos? Todo lo que
habéis visto esta noche ha sido fingido; que no soy yo mujer que por
semejantes camellos había de dejar que me doliese un negro de la uña,
cuanto más morirme.

-Eso creo yo muy bien -dijo Sancho-, que esto del morirse los enamorados es
cosa de risa: bien lo pueden ellos decir, pero hacer, créalo Judas.

Estando en estas pláticas, entró el músico, cantor y poeta que había
cantado las dos ya referidas estancias, el cual, haciendo una gran
reverencia a don Quijote, dijo:

-Vuestra merced, señor caballero, me cuente y tenga en el número de sus
mayores servidores, porque ha muchos días que le soy muy aficionado, así
por su fama como por sus hazañas.

Don Quijote le respondió:

-Vuestra merced me diga quién es, porque mi cortesía responda a sus
merecimientos.

El mozo respondió que era el músico y panegírico de la noche antes.

-Por cierto -replicó don Quijote-, que vuestra merced tiene estremada voz,
pero lo que cantó no me parece que fue muy a propósito; porque, ¿qué tienen
que ver las estancias de Garcilaso con la muerte desta señora?

-No se maraville vuestra merced deso -respondió el músico-, que ya entre
los intonsos poetas de nuestra edad se usa que cada uno escriba como
quisiere, y hurte de quien quisiere, venga o no venga a pelo de su intento,
y ya no hay necedad que canten o escriban que no se atribuya a licencia
poética.

Responder quisiera don Quijote, pero estorbáronlo el duque y la duquesa,
que entraron a verle, entre los cuales pasaron una larga y dulce plática,
en la cual dijo Sancho tantos donaires y tantas malicias, que dejaron de
nuevo admirados a los duques, así con su simplicidad como con su agudeza.
Don Quijote les suplicó le diesen licencia para partirse aquel mismo día,
pues a los vencidos caballeros, como él, más les convenía habitar una
zahúrda que no reales palacios. Diéronsela de muy buena gana, y la duquesa
le preguntó si quedaba en su gracia Altisidora. Él le respondió:

-Señora mía, sepa Vuestra Señoría que todo el mal desta doncella nace de
ociosidad, cuyo remedio es la ocupación honesta y continua. Ella me ha
dicho aquí que se usan randas en el infierno; y, pues ella las debe de
saber hacer, no las deje de la mano, que, ocupada en menear los palillos,
no se menearán en su imaginación la imagen o imágines de lo que bien
quiere; y ésta es la verdad, éste mi parecer y éste es mi consejo.

-Y el mío -añadió Sancho-, pues no he visto en toda mi vida randera que por
amor se haya muerto; que las doncellas ocupadas más ponen sus pensamientos
en acabar sus tareas que en pensar en sus amores. Por mí lo digo, pues,
mientras estoy cavando, no me acuerdo de mi oíslo; digo, de mi Teresa
Panza, a quien quiero más que a las pestañas de mis ojos.

-Vos decís muy bien, Sancho -dijo la duquesa-, y yo haré que mi Altisidora
se ocupe de aquí adelante en hacer alguna labor blanca, que la sabe hacer
por estremo.

-No hay para qué, señora -respondió Altisidora-, usar dese remedio, pues la
consideración de las crueldades que conmigo ha usado este malandrín
mostrenco me le borrarán de la memoria sin otro artificio alguno. Y, con
licencia de vuestra grandeza, me quiero quitar de aquí, por no ver delante
de mis ojos ya no su triste figura, sino su fea y abominable catadura.

-Eso me parece -dijo el duque- a lo que suele decirse:

   Porque aquel que dice injurias,
   cerca está de perdonar.

Hizo Altisidora muestra de limpiarse las lágrimas con un pañuelo, y,
haciendo reverencia a sus señores, se salió del aposento.

-Mándote yo -dijo Sancho-, pobre doncella, mándote, digo, mala ventura,
pues las has habido con una alma de esparto y con un corazón de encina. ¡A
fee que si las hubieras conmigo, que otro gallo te cantara!

Acabóse la plática, vistióse don Quijote, comió con los duques, y partióse
aquella tarde.





Capítulo LXXI. De lo que a don Quijote le sucedió con su escudero Sancho
yendo a su aldea


Iba el vencido y asendereado don Quijote pensativo además por una parte,
y muy alegre por otra. Causaba su tristeza el vencimiento; y la alegría, el
considerar en la virtud de Sancho, como lo había mostrado en la resurreción
de Altisidora, aunque con algún escrúpulo se persuadía a que la enamorada
doncella fuese muerta de veras. No iba nada Sancho alegre, porque le
entristecía ver que Altisidora no le había cumplido la palabra de darle las
camisas; y, yendo y viniendo en esto, dijo a su amo:

-En verdad, señor, que soy el más desgraciado médico que se debe de hallar
en el mundo, en el cual hay físicos que, con matar al enfermo que curan,
quieren ser pagados de su trabajo, que no es otro sino firmar una cedulilla
de algunas medicinas, que no las hace él, sino el boticario, y cátalo
cantusado; y a mí, que la salud ajena me cuesta gotas de sangre, mamonas,
pellizcos, alfilerazos y azotes, no me dan un ardite. Pues yo les voto a
tal que si me traen a las manos otro algún enfermo, que, antes que le cure,
me han de untar las mías; que el abad de donde canta yanta, y no quiero
creer que me haya dado el cielo la virtud que tengo para que yo la
comunique con otros de bóbilis, bóbilis.

-Tú tienes razón, Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, y halo hecho muy
mal Altisidora en no haberte dado las prometidas camisas; y, puesto que tu
virtud es gratis data, que no te ha costado estudio alguno, más que estudio
es recebir martirios en tu persona. De mí te sé decir que si quisieras paga
por los azotes del desencanto de Dulcinea, ya te la hubiera dado tal como
buena; pero no sé si vendrá bien con la cura la paga, y no querría que
impidiese el premio a la medicina. Con todo eso, me parece que no se
perderá nada en probarlo: mira, Sancho, el que quieres, y azótate luego, y
págate de contado y de tu propia mano, pues tienes dineros míos.

A cuyos ofrecimientos abrió Sancho los ojos y las orejas de un palmo, y dio
consentimiento en su corazón a azotarse de buena gana; y dijo a su amo:

-Agora bien, señor, yo quiero disponerme a dar gusto a vuestra merced en lo
que desea, con provecho mío; que el amor de mis hijos y de mi mujer me hace
que me muestre interesado. Dígame vuestra merced: ¿cuánto me dará por cada
azote que me diere?

-Si yo te hubiera de pagar, Sancho -respondió don Quijote-, conforme lo que
merece la grandeza y calidad deste remedio, el tesoro de Venecia, las minas
del Potosí fueran poco para pagarte; toma tú el tiento a lo que llevas mío,
y pon el precio a cada azote.

-Ellos -respondió Sancho- son tres mil y trecientos y tantos; de ellos me
he dado hasta cinco: quedan los demás; entren entre los tantos estos cinco,
y vengamos a los tres mil y trecientos, que a cuartillo cada uno, que no
llevaré menos si todo el mundo me lo mandase, montan tres mil y trecientos
cuartillos, que son los tres mil, mil y quinientos medios reales, que hacen
setecientos y cincuenta reales; y los trecientos hacen ciento y cincuenta
medios reales, que vienen a hacer setenta y cinco reales, que, juntándose a
los setecientos y cincuenta, son por todos ochocientos y veinte y cinco
reales. Éstos desfalcaré yo de los que tengo de vuestra merced, y entraré
en mi casa rico y contento, aunque bien azotado; porque no se toman
truchas..., y no digo más.

-¡Oh Sancho bendito! ¡Oh Sancho amable -respondió don Quijote-, y cuán
obligados hemos de quedar Dulcinea y yo a servirte todos los días que el
cielo nos diere de vida! Si ella vuelve al ser perdido, que no es posible
sino que vuelva, su desdicha habrá sido dicha, y mi vencimiento, felicísimo
triunfo. Y mira, Sancho, cuándo quieres comenzar la diciplina, que porque
la abrevies te añado cien reales.

-¿Cuándo? -replicó Sancho-. Esta noche, sin falta. Procure vuestra merced
que la tengamos en el campo, al cielo abierto, que yo me abriré mis carnes.

Llegó la noche, esperada de don Quijote con la mayor ansia del mundo,
pareciéndole que las ruedas del carro de Apolo se habían quebrado, y que el
día se alargaba más de lo acostumbrado, bien así como acontece a los
enamorados, que jamás ajustan la cuenta de sus deseos. Finalmente, se
entraron entre unos amenos árboles que poco desviados del camino estaban,
donde, dejando vacías la silla y albarda de Rocinante y el rucio, se
tendieron sobre la verde yerba y cenaron del repuesto de Sancho; el cual,
haciendo del cabestro y de la jáquima del rucio un poderoso y flexible
azote, se retiró hasta veinte pasos de su amo, entre unas hayas. Don
Quijote, que le vio ir con denuedo y con brío, le dijo:

-Mira, amigo, que no te hagas pedazos; da lugar que unos azotes aguarden a
otros; no quieras apresurarte tanto en la carrera, que en la mitad della te
falte el aliento; quiero decir que no te des tan recio que te falte la vida
antes de llegar al número deseado. Y, porque no pierdas por carta de más ni
de menos, yo estaré desde aparte contando por este mi rosario los azotes
que te dieres. Favorézcate el cielo conforme tu buena intención merece.

-Al buen pagador no le duelen prendas -respondió Sancho-: yo pienso darme
de manera que, sin matarme, me duela; que en esto debe de consistir la
sustancia deste milagro.

Desnudóse luego de medio cuerpo arriba, y, arrebatando el cordel, comenzó a
darse, y comenzó don Quijote a contar los azotes.

Hasta seis o ocho se habría dado Sancho, cuando le pareció ser pesada la
burla y muy barato el precio della, y, deteniéndose un poco, dijo a su amo
que se llamaba a engaño, porque merecía cada azote de aquéllos ser pagado a
medio real, no que a cuartillo.

-Prosigue, Sancho amigo, y no desmayes -le dijo don Quijote-, que yo doblo
la parada del precio.

-Dese modo -dijo Sancho-, ¡a la mano de Dios, y lluevan azotes!

Pero el socarrón dejó de dárselos en las espaldas, y daba en los árboles,
con unos suspiros de cuando en cuando, que parecía que con cada uno dellos
se le arrancaba el alma. Tierna la de don Quijote, temeroso de que no se le
acabase la vida, y no consiguiese su deseo por la imprudencia de Sancho, le
dijo:

-Por tu vida, amigo, que se quede en este punto este negocio, que me parece
muy áspera esta medicina, y será bien dar tiempo al tiempo; que no se ganó
Zamora en un hora. Más de mil azotes, si yo no he contado mal, te has dado:
bastan por agora; que el asno, hablando a lo grosero, sufre la carga, mas
no la sobrecarga.

-No, no, señor -respondió Sancho-, no se ha de decir por mí: "a dineros
pagados, brazos quebrados". Apártese vuestra merced otro poco y déjeme dar
otros mil azotes siquiera, que a dos levadas déstas habremos cumplido con
esta partida, y aún nos sobrará ropa.

-Pues tú te hallas con tan buena disposición -dijo don Quijote-, el cielo
te ayude, y pégate, que yo me aparto.

Volvió Sancho a su tarea con tanto denuedo, que ya había quitado las
cortezas a muchos árboles: tal era la riguridad con que se azotaba; y,
alzando una vez la voz, y dando un desaforado azote en una haya, dijo:

-¡Aquí morirás, Sansón, y cuantos con él son!

Acudió don Quijote luego al son de la lastimada voz y del golpe del
riguroso azote, y, asiendo del torcido cabestro que le servía de corbacho a
Sancho, le dijo:

-No permita la suerte, Sancho amigo, que por el gusto mío pierdas tú la
vida, que ha de servir para sustentar a tu mujer y a tus hijos: espere
Dulcinea mejor coyuntura, que yo me contendré en los límites de la
esperanza propincua, y esperaré que cobres fuerzas nuevas, para que se
concluya este negocio a gusto de todos.

-Pues vuestra merced, señor mío, lo quiere así -respondió Sancho-, sea en
buena hora, y écheme su ferreruelo sobre estas espaldas, que estoy sudando
y no querría resfriarme; que los nuevos diciplinantes corren este peligro.

Hízolo así don Quijote, y, quedándose en pelota, abrigó a Sancho, el cual
se durmió hasta que le despertó el sol, y luego volvieron a proseguir su
camino, a quien dieron fin, por entonces, en un lugar que tres leguas de
allí estaba. Apeáronse en un mesón, que por tal le reconoció don Quijote, y
no por castillo de cava honda, torres, rastrillos y puente levadiza; que,
después que le vencieron, con más juicio en todas las cosas discurría, como
agora se dirá. Alojáronle en una sala baja, a quien servían de guadameciles
unas sargas viejas pintadas, como se usan en las aldeas. En una dellas
estaba pintada de malísima mano el robo de Elena, cuando el atrevido
huésped se la llevó a Menalao, y en otra estaba la historia de Dido y de
Eneas, ella sobre una alta torre, como que hacía señas con una media sábana
al fugitivo huésped, que por el mar, sobre una fragata o bergantín, se iba
huyendo.

Notó en las dos historias que Elena no iba de muy mala gana, porque se reía
a socapa y a lo socarrón; pero la hermosa Dido mostraba verter lágrimas del
tamaño de nueces por los ojos. Viendo lo cual don Quijote, dijo:

-Estas dos señoras fueron desdichadísimas, por no haber nacido en esta
edad, y yo sobre todos desdichado en no haber nacido en la suya: encontrara
a aquestos señores, ni fuera abrasada Troya, ni Cartago destruida, pues con
sólo que yo matara a Paris se escusaran tantas desgracias.

-Yo apostaré -dijo Sancho- que antes de mucho tiempo no ha de haber
bodegón, venta ni mesón, o tienda de barbero, donde no ande pintada la
historia de nuestras hazañas. Pero querría yo que la pintasen manos de otro
mejor pintor que el que ha pintado a éstas.

-Tienes razón, Sancho -dijo don Quijote-, porque este pintor es como
Orbaneja, un pintor que estaba en Úbeda; que, cuando le preguntaban qué
pintaba, respondía: ''Lo que saliere''; y si por ventura pintaba un gallo,
escribía debajo: "Éste es gallo", porque no pensasen que era zorra. Desta
manera me parece a mí, Sancho, que debe de ser el pintor o escritor, que
todo es uno, que sacó a luz la historia deste nuevo don Quijote que ha
salido: que pintó o escribió lo que saliere; o habrá sido como un poeta que
andaba los años pasados en la corte, llamado Mauleón, el cual respondía de
repente a cuanto le preguntaban; y, preguntándole uno que qué quería decir
Deum de Deo, respondió: ''Dé donde diere''. Pero, dejando esto aparte, dime
si piensas, Sancho, darte otra tanda esta noche, y si quieres que sea
debajo de techado, o al cielo abierto.

-Pardiez, señor -respondió Sancho-, que para lo que yo pienso darme, eso se
me da en casa que en el campo; pero, con todo eso, querría que fuese entre
árboles, que parece que me acompañan y me ayudan a llevar mi trabajo
maravillosamente.

-Pues no ha de ser así, Sancho amigo -respondió don Quijote-, sino que para
que tomes fuerzas, lo hemos de guardar para nuestra aldea, que, a lo más
tarde, llegaremos allá después de mañana.

Sancho respondió que hiciese su gusto, pero que él quisiera concluir con
brevedad aquel negocio a sangre caliente y cuando estaba picado el molino,
porque en la tardanza suele estar muchas veces el peligro; y a Dios rogando
y con el mazo dando, y que más valía un "toma" que dos "te daré", y el
pájaro en la mano que el buitre volando.

-No más refranes, Sancho, por un solo Dios -dijo don Quijote-, que parece
que te vuelves al sicut erat; habla a lo llano, a lo liso, a lo no
intricado, como muchas veces te he dicho, y verás como te vale un pan por
ciento.

-No sé qué mala ventura es esta mía -respondió Sancho-, que no sé decir
razón sin refrán, ni refrán que no me parezca razón; pero yo me enmendaré,
si pudiere.

Y, con esto, cesó por entonces su plática.





Capítulo LXXII. De cómo don Quijote y Sancho llegaron a su aldea


Todo aquel día, esperando la noche, estuvieron en aquel lugar y mesón don
Quijote y Sancho: el uno, para acabar en la campaña rasa la tanda de su
diciplina, y el otro, para ver el fin della, en el cual consistía el de su
deseo. Llegó en esto al mesón un caminante a caballo, con tres o cuatro
criados, uno de los cuales dijo al que el señor dellos parecía:

-Aquí puede vuestra merced, señor don Álvaro Tarfe, pasar hoy la siesta: la
posada parece limpia y fresca.

Oyendo esto don Quijote, le dijo a Sancho:

-Mira, Sancho: cuando yo hojeé aquel libro de la segunda parte de mi
historia, me parece que de pasada topé allí este nombre de don Álvaro
Tarfe.

-Bien podrá ser -respondió Sancho-. Dejémosle apear, que después se lo
preguntaremos.

El caballero se apeó, y, frontero del aposento de don Quijote, la huéspeda
le dio una sala baja, enjaezada con otras pintadas sargas, como las que
tenía la estancia de don Quijote. Púsose el recién venido caballero a lo de
verano, y, saliéndose al portal del mesón, que era espacioso y fresco, por
el cual se paseaba don Quijote, le preguntó:

-¿Adónde bueno camina vuestra merced, señor gentilhombre?

Y don Quijote le respondió:

-A una aldea que está aquí cerca, de donde soy natural. Y vuestra merced,
¿dónde camina?

-Yo, señor -respondió el caballero-, voy a Granada, que es mi patria.

-¡Y buena patria! -replicó don Quijote-. Pero, dígame vuestra merced, por
cortesía, su nombre, porque me parece que me ha de importar saberlo más de
lo que buenamente podré decir.

-Mi nombre es don Álvaro Tarfe -respondió el huésped.

A lo que replicó don Quijote:

-Sin duda alguna pienso que vuestra merced debe de ser aquel don Álvaro
Tarfe que anda impreso en la Segunda parte de la historia de don Quijote de
la Mancha, recién impresa y dada a la luz del mundo por un autor moderno.

-El mismo soy -respondió el caballero-, y el tal don Quijote, sujeto
principal de la tal historia, fue grandísimo amigo mío, y yo fui el que le
sacó de su tierra, o, a lo menos, le moví a que viniese a unas justas que
se hacían en Zaragoza, adonde yo iba; y, en verdad en verdad que le hice
muchas amistades, y que le quité de que no le palmease las espaldas el
verdugo, por ser demasiadamente atrevido.

-Y, dígame vuestra merced, señor don Álvaro, ¿parezco yo en algo a ese tal
don Quijote que vuestra merced dice?

-No, por cierto -respondió el huésped-: en ninguna manera.

-Y ese don Quijote -dijo el nuestro-, ¿traía consigo a un escudero llamado
Sancho Panza?

-Sí traía -respondió don Álvaro-; y, aunque tenía fama de muy gracioso,
nunca le oí decir gracia que la tuviese.

-Eso creo yo muy bien -dijo a esta sazón Sancho-, porque el decir gracias
no es para todos, y ese Sancho que vuestra merced dice, señor gentilhombre,
debe de ser algún grandísimo bellaco, frión y ladrón juntamente, que el
verdadero Sancho Panza soy yo, que tengo más gracias que llovidas; y si no,
haga vuestra merced la experiencia, y ándese tras de mí, por los menos un
año, y verá que se me caen a cada paso, y tales y tantas que, sin saber yo
las más veces lo que me digo, hago reír a cuantos me escuchan; y el
verdadero don Quijote de la Mancha, el famoso, el valiente y el discreto,
el enamorado, el desfacedor de agravios, el tutor de pupilos y huérfanos,
el amparo de las viudas, el matador de las doncellas, el que tiene por
única señora a la sin par Dulcinea del Toboso, es este señor que está
presente, que es mi amo; todo cualquier otro don Quijote y cualquier otro
Sancho Panza es burlería y cosa de sueño.

-¡Por Dios que lo creo! -respondió don Álvaro-, porque más gracias habéis
dicho vos, amigo, en cuatro razones que habéis hablado, que el otro Sancho
Panza en cuantas yo le oí hablar, que fueron muchas. Más tenía de comilón
que de bien hablado, y más de tonto que de gracioso, y tengo por sin duda
que los encantadores que persiguen a don Quijote el bueno han querido
perseguirme a mí con don Quijote el malo. Pero no sé qué me diga; que osaré
yo jurar que le dejo metido en la casa del Nuncio, en Toledo, para que le
curen, y agora remanece aquí otro don Quijote, aunque bien diferente del
mío.

-Yo -dijo don Quijote- no sé si soy bueno, pero sé decir que no soy el
malo; para prueba de lo cual quiero que sepa vuesa merced, mi señor don
Álvaro Tarfe, que en todos los días de mi vida no he estado en Zaragoza;
antes, por haberme dicho que ese don Quijote fantástico se había hallado en
las justas desa ciudad, no quise yo entrar en ella, por sacar a las barbas
del mundo su mentira; y así, me pasé de claro a Barcelona, archivo de la
cortesía, albergue de los estranjeros, hospital de los pobres, patria de
los valientes, venganza de los ofendidos y correspondencia grata de firmes
amistades, y, en sitio y en belleza, única. Y, aunque los sucesos que en
ella me han sucedido no son de mucho gusto, sino de mucha pesadumbre, los
llevo sin ella, sólo por haberla visto. Finalmente, señor don Álvaro Tarfe,
yo soy don Quijote de la Mancha, el mismo que dice la fama, y no ese
desventurado que ha querido usurpar mi nombre y honrarse con mis
pensamientos. A vuestra merced suplico, por lo que debe a ser caballero,
sea servido de hacer una declaración ante el alcalde deste lugar, de que
vuestra merced no me ha visto en todos los días de su vida hasta agora, y
de que yo no soy el don Quijote impreso en la segunda parte, ni este Sancho
Panza mi escudero es aquél que vuestra merced conoció.

-Eso haré yo de muy buena gana -respondió don Álvaro-, puesto que cause
admiración ver dos don Quijotes y dos Sanchos a un mismo tiempo, tan
conformes en los nombres como diferentes en las acciones; y vuelvo a decir
y me afirmo que no he visto lo que he visto, ni ha pasado por mí lo que ha
pasado.

-Sin duda -dijo Sancho- que vuestra merced debe de estar encantado, como
mi señora Dulcinea del Toboso, y pluguiera al cielo que estuviera su
desencanto de vuestra merced en darme otros tres mil y tantos azotes como
me doy por ella, que yo me los diera sin interés alguno.

-No entiendo eso de azotes -dijo don Álvaro.

Y Sancho le respondió que era largo de contar, pero que él se lo contaría
si acaso iban un mesmo camino.

Llegóse en esto la hora de comer; comieron juntos don Quijote y don Álvaro.
Entró acaso el alcalde del pueblo en el mesón, con un escribano, ante el
cual alcalde pidió don Quijote, por una petición, de que a su derecho
convenía de que don Álvaro Tarfe, aquel caballero que allí estaba presente,
declarase ante su merced como no conocía a don Quijote de la Mancha, que
asimismo estaba allí presente, y que no era aquél que andaba impreso en una
historia intitulada: Segunda parte de don Quijote de la Mancha, compuesta
por un tal de Avellaneda, natural de Tordesillas. Finalmente, el alcalde
proveyó jurídicamente; la declaración se hizo con todas las fuerzas que en
tales casos debían hacerse, con lo que quedaron don Quijote y Sancho muy
alegres, como si les importara mucho semejante declaración y no mostrara
claro la diferencia de los dos don Quijotes y la de los dos Sanchos sus
obras y sus palabras. Muchas de cortesías y ofrecimientos pasaron entre don
Álvaro y don Quijote, en las cuales mostró el gran manchego su discreción,
de modo que desengañó a don Álvaro Tarfe del error en que estaba; el cual
se dio a entender que debía de estar encantado, pues tocaba con la mano dos
tan contrarios don Quijotes.

Llegó la tarde, partiéronse de aquel lugar, y a obra de media legua se
apartaban dos caminos diferentes, el uno que guiaba a la aldea de don
Quijote, y el otro el que había de llevar don Álvaro. En este poco espacio
le contó don Quijote la desgracia de su vencimiento y el encanto y el
remedio de Dulcinea, que todo puso en nueva admiración a don Álvaro, el
cual, abrazando a don Quijote y a Sancho, siguió su camino, y don Quijote
el suyo, que aquella noche la pasó entre otros árboles, por dar lugar a
Sancho de cumplir su penitencia, que la cumplió del mismo modo que la
pasada noche, a costa de las cortezas de las hayas, harto más que de sus
espaldas, que las guardó tanto, que no pudieran quitar los azotes una
mosca, aunque la tuviera encima.

No perdió el engañado don Quijote un solo golpe de la cuenta, y halló que
con los de la noche pasada era tres mil y veinte y nueve. Parece que había
madrugado el sol a ver el sacrificio, con cuya luz volvieron a proseguir su
camino, tratando entre los dos del engaño de don Álvaro y de cuán bien
acordado había sido tomar su declaración ante la justicia, y tan
auténticamente.

Aquel día y aquella noche caminaron sin sucederles cosa digna de contarse,
si no fue que en ella acabó Sancho su tarea, de que quedó don Quijote
contento sobremodo, y esperaba el día, por ver si en el camino topaba ya
desencantada a Dulcinea su señora; y, siguiendo su camino, no topaba mujer
ninguna que no iba a reconocer si era Dulcinea del Toboso, teniendo por
infalible no poder mentir las promesas de Merlín.

Con estos pensamientos y deseos subieron una cuesta arriba, desde la cual
descubrieron su aldea, la cual, vista de Sancho, se hincó de rodillas y
dijo:

-Abre los ojos, deseada patria, y mira que vuelve a ti Sancho Panza, tu
hijo, si no muy rico, muy bien azotado. Abre los brazos y recibe también tu
hijo don Quijote, que si viene vencido de los brazos ajenos, viene vencedor
de sí mismo; que, según él me ha dicho, es el mayor vencimiento que
desearse puede. Dineros llevo, porque si buenos azotes me daban, bien
caballero me iba.

-Déjate desas sandeces -dijo don Quijote-, y vamos con pie derecho a entrar
en nuestro lugar, donde daremos vado a nuestras imaginaciones, y la traza
que en la pastoral vida pensamos ejercitar.

Con esto, bajaron de la cuesta y se fueron a su pueblo.





Capítulo LXXIII. De los agüeros que tuvo don Quijote al entrar de su aldea,
con otros sucesos que adornan y acreditan esta grande historia


A la entrada del cual, según dice Cide Hamete, vio don Quijote que en las
eras del lugar estaban riñendo dos mochachos, y el uno dijo al otro:

-No te canses Periquillo, que no la has de ver en todos los días de tu
vida.

Oyólo don Quijote, y dijo a Sancho:

-¿No adviertes, amigo, lo que aquel mochacho ha dicho: ''no la has de ver
en todos los días de tu vida''?

-Pues bien, ¿qué importa -respondió Sancho- que haya dicho eso el mochacho?

-¿Qué? -replicó don Quijote-. ¿No vees tú que, aplicando aquella palabra a
mi intención, quiere significar que no tengo de ver más a Dulcinea?

Queríale responder Sancho, cuando se lo estorbó ver que por aquella campaña
venía huyendo una liebre, seguida de muchos galgos y cazadores, la cual,
temerosa, se vino a recoger y a agazapar debajo de los pies del rucio.
Cogióla Sancho a mano salva y presentósela a don Quijote, el cual estaba
diciendo:

-Malum signum! Malum signum! Liebre huye, galgos la siguen: ¡Dulcinea no
parece!

-Estraño es vuesa merced -dijo Sancho-. Presupongamos que esta liebre es
Dulcinea del Toboso y estos galgos que la persiguen son los malandrines
encantadores que la transformaron en labradora: ella huye, yo la cojo y la
pongo en poder de vuesa merced, que la tiene en sus brazos y la regala:
¿qué mala señal es ésta, ni qué mal agüero se puede tomar de aquí?

Los dos mochachos de la pendencia se llegaron a ver la liebre, y al uno
dellos preguntó Sancho que por qué reñían. Y fuele respondido por el que
había dicho ''no la verás más en toda tu vida'', que él había tomado al
otro mochacho una jaula de grillos, la cual no pensaba volvérsela en toda
su vida. Sacó Sancho cuatro cuartos de la faltriquera y dióselos al
mochacho por la jaula, y púsosela en las manos a don Quijote, diciendo:

-He aquí, señor, rompidos y desbaratados estos agüeros, que no tienen que
ver más con nuestros sucesos, según que yo imagino, aunque tonto, que con
las nubes de antaño. Y si no me acuerdo mal, he oído decir al cura de
nuestro pueblo que no es de personas cristianas ni discretas mirar en estas
niñerías; y aun vuesa merced mismo me lo dijo los días pasados, dándome a
entender que eran tontos todos aquellos cristianos que miraban en agüeros.
Y no es menester hacer hincapié en esto, sino pasemos adelante y entremos
en nuestra aldea.

Llegaron los cazadores, pidieron su liebre, y diósela don Quijote; pasaron
adelante, y, a la entrada del pueblo, toparon en un pradecillo rezando al
cura y al bachiller Carrasco. Y es de saber que Sancho Panza había echado
sobre el rucio y sobre el lío de las armas, para que sirviese de repostero,
la túnica de bocací, pintada de llamas de fuego que le vistieron en el
castillo del duque la noche que volvió en sí Altisidora. Acomodóle también
la coroza en la cabeza, que fue la más nueva transformación y adorno con
que se vio jamás jumento en el mundo.

Fueron luego conocidos los dos del cura y del bachiller, que se vinieron a
ellos con los brazos abiertos. Apeóse don Quijote y abrazólos
estrechamente; y los mochachos, que son linces no escusados, divisaron la
coroza del jumento y acudieron a verle, y decían unos a otros:

-Venid, mochachos, y veréis el asno de Sancho Panza más galán que Mingo, y
la bestia de don Quijote más flaca hoy que el primer día.

Finalmente, rodeados de mochachos y acompañados del cura y del bachiller,
entraron en el pueblo, y se fueron a casa de don Quijote, y hallaron a la
puerta della al ama y a su sobrina, a quien ya habían llegado las nuevas de
su venida. Ni más ni menos se las habían dado a Teresa Panza, mujer de
Sancho, la cual, desgreñada y medio desnuda, trayendo de la mano a
Sanchica, su hija, acudió a ver a su marido; y, viéndole no tan bien
adeliñado como ella se pensaba que había de estar un gobernador, le dijo:

-¿Cómo venís así, marido mío, que me parece que venís a pie y despeado, y
más traéis semejanza de desgobernado que de gobernador?

-Calla, Teresa -respondió Sancho-, que muchas veces donde hay estacas no
hay tocinos, y vámonos a nuestra casa, que allá oirás maravillas. Dineros
traigo, que es lo que importa, ganados por mi industria y sin daño de
nadie.

-Traed vos dinero, mi buen marido -dijo Teresa-, y sean ganados por aquí o
por allí, que, comoquiera que los hayáis ganado, no habréis hecho usanza
nueva en el mundo.

Abrazó Sanchica a su padre, y preguntóle si traía algo, que le estaba
esperando como el agua de mayo; y, asiéndole de un lado del cinto, y su
mujer de la mano, tirando su hija al rucio, se fueron a su casa, dejando a
don Quijote en la suya, en poder de su sobrina y de su ama, y en compañía
del cura y del bachiller.

Don Quijote, sin guardar términos ni horas, en aquel mismo punto se apartó
a solas con el bachiller y el cura, y en breves razones les contó su
vencimiento, y la obligación en que había quedado de no salir de su aldea
en un año, la cual pensaba guardar al pie de la letra, sin traspasarla en
un átomo, bien así como caballero andante, obligado por la puntualidad y
orden de la andante caballería, y que tenía pensado de hacerse aquel año
pastor, y entretenerse en la soledad de los campos, donde a rienda suelta
podía dar vado a sus amorosos pensamientos, ejercitándose en el pastoral y
virtuoso ejercicio; y que les suplicaba, si no tenían mucho que hacer y no
estaban impedidos en negocios más importantes, quisiesen ser sus
compañeros; que él compraría ovejas y ganado suficiente que les diese
nombre de pastores; y que les hacía saber que lo más principal de aquel
negocio estaba hecho, porque les tenía puestos los nombres, que les
vendrían como de molde. Díjole el cura que los dijese. Respondió don
Quijote que él se había de llamar el pastor Quijotiz; y el bachiller, el
pastor Carrascón; y el cura, el pastor Curambro; y Sancho Panza, el pastor
Pancino.

Pasmáronse todos de ver la nueva locura de don Quijote; pero, porque no se
les fuese otra vez del pueblo a sus caballerías, esperando que en aquel año
podría ser curado, concedieron con su nueva intención, y aprobaron por
discreta su locura, ofreciéndosele por compañeros en su ejercicio.

-Y más -dijo Sansón Carrasco-, que, como ya todo el mundo sabe, yo soy
celebérrimo poeta y a cada paso compondré versos pastoriles, o cortesanos,
o como más me viniere a cuento, para que nos entretengamos por esos
andurriales donde habemos de andar; y lo que más es menester, señores míos,
es que cada uno escoja el nombre de la pastora que piensa celebrar en sus
versos, y que no dejemos árbol, por duro que sea, donde no la retule y
grabe su nombre, como es uso y costumbre de los enamorados pastores.

-Eso está de molde -respondió don Quijote-, puesto que yo estoy libre de
buscar nombre de pastora fingida, pues está ahí la sin par Dulcinea del
Toboso, gloria de estas riberas, adorno de estos prados, sustento de la
hermosura, nata de los donaires, y, finalmente, sujeto sobre quien puede
asentar bien toda alabanza, por hipérbole que sea.

-Así es verdad -dijo el cura-, pero nosotros buscaremos por ahí pastoras
mañeruelas, que si no nos cuadraren, nos esquinen.

A lo que añadió Sansón Carrasco:

-Y cuando faltaren, darémosles los nombres de las estampadas e impresas,
de quien está lleno el mundo: Fílidas, Amarilis, Dianas, Fléridas,
Galateas y Belisardas; que, pues las venden en las plazas, bien las podemos
comprar nosotros y tenerlas por nuestras. Si mi dama, o, por mejor decir,
mi pastora, por ventura se llamare Ana, la celebraré debajo del nombre de
Anarda; y si Francisca, la llamaré yo Francenia; y si Lucía, Lucinda, que
todo se sale allá; y Sancho Panza, si es que ha de entrar en esta cofadría,
podrá celebrar a su mujer Teresa Panza con nombre de Teresaina.

Rióse don Quijote de la aplicación del nombre, y el cura le alabó infinito
su honesta y honrada resolución, y se ofreció de nuevo a hacerle compañía
todo el tiempo que le vacase de atender a sus forzosas obligaciones. Con
esto, se despidieron dél, y le rogaron y aconsejaron tuviese cuenta con su
salud, con regalarse lo que fuese bueno.

Quiso la suerte que su sobrina y el ama oyeron la plática de los tres; y,
así como se fueron, se entraron entrambas con don Quijote, y la sobrina le
dijo:

-¿Qué es esto, señor tío? ¿Ahora que pensábamos nosotras que vuestra merced
volvía a reducirse en su casa, y pasar en ella una vida quieta y honrada,
se quiere meter en nuevos laberintos, haciéndose

   Pastorcillo, tú que vienes,
   pastorcico, tú que vas?

Pues en verdad que está ya duro el alcacel para zampoñas.

A lo que añadió el ama:

Y ¿podrá vuestra merced pasar en el campo las siestas del verano, los
serenos del invierno, el aullido de los lobos? No, por cierto, que éste es
ejercicio y oficio de hombres robustos, curtidos y criados para tal
ministerio casi desde las fajas y mantillas. Aun, mal por mal, mejor es ser
caballero andante que pastor. Mire, señor, tome mi consejo, que no se le
doy sobre estar harta de pan y vino, sino en ayunas, y sobre cincuenta años
que tengo de edad: estése en su casa, atienda a su hacienda, confiese a
menudo, favorezca a los pobres, y sobre mi ánima si mal le fuere.

-Callad, hijas -les respondió don Quijote-, que yo sé bien lo que me
cumple. Llevadme al lecho, que me parece que no estoy muy bueno, y tened
por cierto que, ahora sea caballero andante o pastor por andar, no dejaré
siempre de acudir a lo que hubiéredes menester, como lo veréis por la obra.

Y las buenas hijas -que lo eran sin duda ama y sobrina- le llevaron a la
cama, donde le dieron de comer y regalaron lo posible.





Capítulo LXXIV. De cómo don Quijote cayó malo, y del testamento que hizo, y
su muerte


Como las cosas humanas no sean eternas, yendo siempre en declinación de sus
principios hasta llegar a su último fin, especialmente las vidas de los
hombres, y como la de don Quijote no tuviese privilegio del cielo para
detener el curso de la suya, llegó su fin y acabamiento cuando él menos lo
pensaba; porque, o ya fuese de la melancolía que le causaba el verse
vencido, o ya por la disposición del cielo, que así lo ordenaba, se le
arraigó una calentura que le tuvo seis días en la cama, en los cuales fue
visitado muchas veces del cura, del bachiller y del barbero, sus amigos,
sin quitársele de la cabecera Sancho Panza, su buen escudero.

Éstos, creyendo que la pesadumbre de verse vencido y de no ver cumplido su
deseo en la libertad y desencanto de Dulcinea le tenía de aquella suerte,
por todas las vías posibles procuraban alegrarle, diciéndole el bachiller
que se animase y levantase, para comenzar su pastoral ejercicio, para el
cual tenía ya compuesta una écloga, que mal año para cuantas Sanazaro había
compuesto, y que ya tenía comprados de su propio dinero dos famosos perros
para guardar el ganado: el uno llamado Barcino, y el otro Butrón, que se
los había vendido un ganadero del Quintanar. Pero no por esto dejaba don
Quijote sus tristezas.

Llamaron sus amigos al médico, tomóle el pulso, y no le contentó mucho, y
dijo que, por sí o por no, atendiese a la salud de su alma, porque la del
cuerpo corría peligro. Oyólo don Quijote con ánimo sosegado, pero no lo
oyeron así su ama, su sobrina y su escudero, los cuales comenzaron a llorar
tiernamente, como si ya le tuvieran muerto delante. Fue el parecer del
médico que melancolías y desabrimientos le acababan. Rogó don Quijote que
le dejasen solo, porque quería dormir un poco. Hiciéronlo así y durmió de
un tirón, como dicen, más de seis horas; tanto, que pensaron el ama y la
sobrina que se había de quedar en el sueño. Despertó al cabo del tiempo
dicho, y, dando una gran voz, dijo:

-¡Bendito sea el poderoso Dios, que tanto bien me ha hecho! En fin, sus
misericordias no tienen límite, ni las abrevian ni impiden los pecados de
los hombres.

Estuvo atenta la sobrina a las razones del tío, y pareciéronle más
concertadas que él solía decirlas, a lo menos, en aquella enfermedad, y
preguntóle:

-¿Qué es lo que vuestra merced dice, señor? ¿Tenemos algo de nuevo? ¿Qué
misericordias son éstas, o qué pecados de los hombres?

-Las misericordias -respondió don Quijote-, sobrina, son las que en este
instante ha usado Dios conmigo, a quien, como dije, no las impiden mis
pecados. Yo tengo juicio ya, libre y claro, sin las sombras caliginosas de
la ignorancia, que sobre él me pusieron mi amarga y continua leyenda de los
detestables libros de las caballerías. Ya conozco sus disparates y sus
embelecos, y no me pesa sino que este desengaño ha llegado tan tarde, que
no me deja tiempo para hacer alguna recompensa, leyendo otros que sean luz
del alma. Yo me siento, sobrina, a punto de muerte; querría hacerla de tal
modo, que diese a entender que no había sido mi vida tan mala que dejase
renombre de loco, que, puesto que lo he sido, no querría confirmar esta
verdad en mi muerte. Llámame, amiga, a mis buenos amigos: el cura, al
bachiller Sansón Carrasco y a maese Nicolás, el barbero, que quiero
confesarme y hacer mi testamento.

Pero de este trabajo se escusó la sobrina con la entrada de los tres.
Apenas los vio don Quijote, cuando dijo:

-Dadme albricias, buenos señores, de que ya yo no soy don Quijote de la
Mancha, sino Alonso Quijano, a quien mis costumbres me dieron renombre de
Bueno. Ya soy enemigo de Amadís de Gaula y de toda la infinita caterva de
su linaje, ya me son odiosas todas las historias profanas del andante
caballería, ya conozco mi necedad y el peligro en que me pusieron haberlas
leído, ya, por misericordia de Dios, escarmentando en cabeza propia, las
abomino.

Cuando esto le oyeron decir los tres, creyeron, sin duda, que alguna nueva
locura le había tomado. Y Sansón le dijo:

-¿Ahora, señor don Quijote, que tenemos nueva que está desencantada la
señora Dulcinea, sale vuestra merced con eso? Y ¿agora que estamos tan a
pique de ser pastores, para pasar cantando la vida, como unos príncipes,
quiere vuesa merced hacerse ermitaño? Calle, por su vida, vuelva en sí, y
déjese de cuentos.

-Los de hasta aquí -replicó don Quijote-, que han sido verdaderos en mi
daño, los ha de volver mi muerte, con ayuda del cielo, en mi provecho. Yo,
señores, siento que me voy muriendo a toda priesa; déjense burlas aparte, y
traíganme un confesor que me confiese y un escribano que haga mi
testamento, que en tales trances como éste no se ha de burlar el hombre con
el alma; y así, suplico que, en tanto que el señor cura me confiesa, vayan
por el escribano.

Miráronse unos a otros, admirados de las razones de don Quijote, y, aunque
en duda, le quisieron creer; y una de las señales por donde conjeturaron se
moría fue el haber vuelto con tanta facilidad de loco a cuerdo, porque a
las ya dichas razones añadió otras muchas tan bien dichas, tan cristianas y
con tanto concierto, que del todo les vino a quitar la duda, y a creer que
estaba cuerdo.

Hizo salir la gente el cura, y quedóse solo con él, y confesóle.

El bachiller fue por el escribano, y de allí a poco volvió con él y con
Sancho Panza; el cual Sancho, que ya sabía por nuevas del bachiller en qué
estado estaba su señor, hallando a la ama y a la sobrina llorosas, comenzó
a hacer pucheros y a derramar lágrimas. Acabóse la confesión, y salió el
cura, diciendo:

-Verdaderamente se muere, y verdaderamente está cuerdo Alonso Quijano el
Bueno; bien podemos entrar para que haga su testamento.

Estas nuevas dieron un terrible empujón a los ojos preñados de ama, sobrina
y de Sancho Panza, su buen escudero, de tal manera, que los hizo reventar
las lágrimas de los ojos y mil profundos suspiros del pecho; porque,
verdaderamente, como alguna vez se ha dicho, en tanto que don Quijote fue
Alonso Quijano el Bueno, a secas, y en tanto que fue don Quijote de la
Mancha, fue siempre de apacible condición y de agradable trato, y por esto
no sólo era bien querido de los de su casa, sino de todos cuantos le
conocían.

Entró el escribano con los demás, y, después de haber hecho la cabeza del
testamento y ordenado su alma don Quijote, con todas aquellas
circunstancias cristianas que se requieren, llegando a las mandas, dijo:

-Ítem, es mi voluntad que de ciertos dineros que Sancho Panza, a quien en
mi locura hice mi escudero, tiene, que, porque ha habido entre él y mí
ciertas cuentas, y dares y tomares, quiero que no se le haga cargo dellos,
ni se le pida cuenta alguna, sino que si sobrare alguno, después de haberse
pagado de lo que le debo, el restante sea suyo, que será bien poco, y buen
provecho le haga; y, si como estando yo loco fui parte para darle el
gobierno de la ínsula, pudiera agora, estando cuerdo, darle el de un reino,
se le diera, porque la sencillez de su condición y fidelidad de su trato lo
merece.

Y, volviéndose a Sancho, le dijo:

-Perdóname, amigo, de la ocasión que te he dado de parecer loco como yo,
haciéndote caer en el error en que yo he caído, de que hubo y hay
caballeros andantes en el mundo.

-¡Ay! -respondió Sancho, llorando-: no se muera vuestra merced, señor mío,
sino tome mi consejo y viva muchos años, porque la mayor locura que puede
hacer un hombre en esta vida es dejarse morir, sin más ni más, sin que
nadie le mate, ni otras manos le acaben que las de la melancolía. Mire no
sea perezoso, sino levántese desa cama, y vámonos al campo vestidos de
pastores, como tenemos concertado: quizá tras de alguna mata hallaremos a
la señora doña Dulcinea desencantada, que no haya más que ver. Si es que se
muere de pesar de verse vencido, écheme a mí la culpa, diciendo que por
haber yo cinchado mal a Rocinante le derribaron; cuanto más, que vuestra
merced habrá visto en sus libros de caballerías ser cosa ordinaria
derribarse unos caballeros a otros, y el que es vencido hoy ser vencedor
mañana.

-Así es -dijo Sansón-, y el buen Sancho Panza está muy en la verdad destos
casos.

-Señores -dijo don Quijote-, vámonos poco a poco, pues ya en los nidos de
antaño no hay pájaros hogaño: yo fui loco, y ya soy cuerdo; fui don Quijote
de la Mancha, y soy agora, como he dicho, Alonso Quijano el Bueno. Pueda
con vuestras mercedes mi arrepentimiento y mi verdad volverme a la
estimación que de mí se tenía, y prosiga adelante el señor escribano.

»Ítem, mando toda mi hacienda, a puerta cerrada, a Antonia Quijana, mi
sobrina, que está presente, habiendo sacado primero de lo más bien parado
della lo que fuere menester para cumplir las mandas que dejo hechas; y la
primera satisfación que se haga quiero que sea pagar el salario que debo
del tiempo que mi ama me ha servido, y más veinte ducados para un vestido.
Dejo por mis albaceas al señor cura y al señor bachiller Sansón Carrasco,
que están presentes.

»Ítem, es mi voluntad que si Antonia Quijana, mi sobrina, quisiere casarse,
se case con hombre de quien primero se haya hecho información que no sabe
qué cosas sean libros de caballerías; y, en caso que se averiguare que lo
sabe, y, con todo eso, mi sobrina quisiere casarse con él, y se casare,
pierda todo lo que le he mandado, lo cual puedan mis albaceas distribuir en
obras pías a su voluntad.

»Ítem, suplico a los dichos señores mis albaceas que si la buena suerte les
trujere a conocer al autor que dicen que compuso una historia que anda por
ahí con el título de Segunda parte de las hazañas de don Quijote de la
Mancha, de mi parte le pidan, cuan encarecidamente ser pueda, perdone la
ocasión que sin yo pensarlo le di de haber escrito tantos y tan grandes
disparates como en ella escribe, porque parto desta vida con escrúpulo de
haberle dado motivo para escribirlos.

Cerró con esto el testamento, y, tomándole un desmayo, se tendió de largo a
largo en la cama. Alborotáronse todos y acudieron a su remedio, y en tres
días que vivió después deste donde hizo el testamento, se desmayaba muy a
menudo. Andaba la casa alborotada; pero, con todo, comía la sobrina,
brindaba el ama, y se regocijaba Sancho Panza; que esto del heredar algo
borra o templa en el heredero la memoria de la pena que es razón que deje
el muerto.

En fin, llegó el último de don Quijote, después de recebidos todos los
sacramentos, y después de haber abominado con muchas y eficaces razones de
los libros de caballerías. Hallóse el escribano presente, y dijo que nunca
había leído en ningún libro de caballerías que algún caballero andante
hubiese muerto en su lecho tan sosegadamente y tan cristiano como don
Quijote; el cual, entre compasiones y lágrimas de los que allí se hallaron,
dio su espíritu: quiero decir que se murió.

Viendo lo cual el cura, pidió al escribano le diese por testimonio como
Alonso Quijano el Bueno, llamado comúnmente don Quijote de la Mancha, había
pasado desta presente vida y muerto naturalmente; y que el tal testimonio
pedía para quitar la ocasión de algún otro autor que Cide Hamete Benengeli
le resucitase falsamente, y hiciese inacabables historias de sus hazañas.

Este fin tuvo el Ingenioso Hidalgo de la Mancha, cuyo lugar no quiso poner
Cide Hamete puntualmente, por dejar que todas las villas y lugares de la
Mancha contendiesen entre sí por ahijársele y tenérsele por suyo, como
contendieron las siete ciudades de Grecia por Homero.

Déjanse de poner aquí los llantos de Sancho, sobrina y ama de don Quijote,
los nuevos epitafios de su sepultura, aunque Sansón Carrasco le puso éste:

   Yace aquí el Hidalgo fuerte
   que a tanto estremo llegó
   de valiente, que se advierte
   que la muerte no triunfó
   de su vida con su muerte.
   Tuvo a todo el mundo en poco;
   fue el espantajo y el coco
   del mundo, en tal coyuntura,
   que acreditó su ventura
   morir cuerdo y vivir loco.

Y el prudentísimo Cide Hamete dijo a su pluma:

-Aquí quedarás, colgada desta espetera y deste hilo de alambre, ni sé si
bien cortada o mal tajada péñola mía, adonde vivirás luengos siglos, si
presuntuosos y malandrines historiadores no te descuelgan para profanarte.
Pero, antes que a ti lleguen, les puedes advertir, y decirles en el mejor
modo que pudieres:

   ''¡Tate, tate, folloncicos!
   De ninguno sea tocada;
   porque esta impresa, buen rey,
   para mí estaba guardada.

Para mí sola nació don Quijote, y yo para él; él supo obrar y yo escribir;
solos los dos somos para en uno, a despecho y pesar del escritor fingido y
tordesillesco que se atrevió, o se ha de atrever, a escribir con pluma de
avestruz grosera y mal deliñada las hazañas de mi valeroso caballero,
porque no es carga de sus hombros ni asunto de su resfriado ingenio; a
quien advertirás, si acaso llegas a conocerle, que deje reposar en la
sepultura los cansados y ya podridos huesos de don Quijote, y no le quiera
llevar, contra todos los fueros de la muerte, a Castilla la Vieja,
haciéndole salir de la fuesa donde real y verdaderamente yace tendido de
largo a largo, imposibilitado de hacer tercera jornada y salida nueva; que,
para hacer burla de tantas como hicieron tantos andantes caballeros, bastan
las dos que él hizo, tan a gusto y beneplácito de las gentes a cuya noticia
llegaron, así en éstos como en los estraños reinos''. Y con esto cumplirás
con tu cristiana profesión, aconsejando bien a quien mal te quiere, y yo
quedaré satisfecho y ufano de haber sido el primero que gozó el fruto de
sus escritos enteramente, como deseaba, pues no ha sido otro mi deseo que
poner en aborrecimiento de los hombres las fingidas y disparatadas
historias de los libros de caballerías, que, por las de mi verdadero don
Quijote, van ya tropezando, y han de caer del todo, sin duda alguna. Vale.



Fin









End of Project Gutenberg's Don Quijote, by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DON QUIJOTE ***

***** This file should be named 2000-8.txt or 2000-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/2000/

Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer. Text
file corrections and new HTML file by Joaquin Cuenca Abela.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King James Bible

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The King James Bible

Release Date: March 2, 2011 [EBook #10]
[This King James Bible was orginally posted by Project Gutenberg
in late 1989]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING JAMES BIBLE ***














The Old Testament of the King James Version of the Bible




The First Book of Moses:  Called Genesis


1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.

1:2 And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters.

1:3 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

1:4 And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5 And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.
And the evening and the morning were the first day.

1:6 And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters.

1:7 And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were
under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament:
and it was so.

1:8 And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the
morning were the second day.

1:9 And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

1:10 And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.

1:11 And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is
in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

1:12 And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after
his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after
his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:13 And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14 And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven
to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and years: 1:15 And let them be for lights in
the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so.

1:16 And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

1:17 And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, 1:18 And to rule over the day and over the night, and
to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

1:19 And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

1:20 And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.

1:21 And God created great whales, and every living creature that
moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind,
and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:22 And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

1:23 And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

1:24 And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after
his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his
kind: and it was so.

1:25 And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle
after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after
his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:26 And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

1:27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
he him; male and female created he them.

1:28 And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth.

1:29 And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which
is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

1:30 And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air,
and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is
life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

1:31 And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

2:1 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them.

2:2 And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

2:3 And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that
in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4 These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the
heavens, 2:5 And every plant of the field before it was in the earth,
and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not
caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the
ground.

2:6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole
face of the ground.

2:7 And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living
soul.

2:8 And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he
put the man whom he had formed.

2:9 And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

2:10 And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence
it was parted, and became into four heads.

2:11 The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the
whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; 2:12 And the gold of that
land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

2:13 And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

2:14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15 And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of
Eden to dress it and to keep it.

2:16 And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat: 2:17 But of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

2:18 And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

2:19 And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the
field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see
what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof.

2:20 And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an
help meet for him.

2:21 And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
thereof; 2:22 And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made
he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

2:23 And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

2:24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

2:25 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed.

3:1 Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which
the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said,
Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?  3:2 And the woman said
unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
3:3 But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die.

3:4 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die: 3:5
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

3:6 And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that
it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one
wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto
her husband with her; and he did eat.

3:7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons.

3:8 And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in
the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden.

3:9 And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art
thou?  3:10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.

3:11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten
of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
3:12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13 And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast
done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

3:14 And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life: 3:15 And I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head,
and thou shalt bruise his heel.

3:16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and
thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

3:17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice
of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee,
saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake;
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; 3:18 Thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field; 3:19 In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

3:20 And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother
of all living.

3:21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of
skins, and clothed them.

3:22 And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: 3:23 Therefore the
LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground
from whence he was taken.

3:24 So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden
of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep
the way of the tree of life.

4:1 And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and
said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.

4:2 And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of
sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

4:3 And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the
fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.

4:4 And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of
the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his
offering: 4:5 But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect.
And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

4:6 And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy
countenance fallen?  4:7 If thou doest well, shalt thou not be
accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

4:8 And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when
they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother,
and slew him.

4:9 And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he
said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?  4:10 And he said, What
hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from
the ground.

4:11 And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her
mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand; 4:12 When thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her
strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

4:13 And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can
bear.

4:14 Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the
earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and
a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one
that findeth me shall slay me.

4:15 And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark
upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

4:16 And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the
land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

4:17 And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he
builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his
son, Enoch.

4:18 And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and
Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.

4:19 And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah,
and the name of the other Zillah.

4:20 And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents,
and of such as have cattle.

4:21 And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such
as handle the harp and organ.

4:22 And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every
artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.

4:23 And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice;
ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to
my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

4:24 If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and
sevenfold.

4:25 And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his
name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead
of Abel, whom Cain slew.

4:26 And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his
name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the LORD.

5:1 This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God
created man, in the likeness of God made he him; 5:2 Male and female
created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the
day when they were created.

5:3 And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his
own likeness, and after his image; and called his name Seth: 5:4 And
the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years:
and he begat sons and daughters: 5:5 And all the days that Adam lived
were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.

5:6 And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos: 5:7 And
Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and
begat sons and daughters: 5:8 And all the days of Seth were nine
hundred and twelve years: and he died.

5:9 And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan: 5:10 And Enos lived
after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons
and daughters: 5:11 And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and
five years: and he died.

5:12 And Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel: 5:13 And
Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years,
and begat sons and daughters: 5:14 And all the days of Cainan were
nine hundred and ten years: and he died.

5:15 And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared: 5:16
And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:17 And all the days of
Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

5:18 And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat
Enoch: 5:19 And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters: 5:20 And all the days of Jared were nine
hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

5:21 And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah: 5:22
And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:23 And all the days of Enoch
were three hundred sixty and five years: 5:24 And Enoch walked with
God: and he was not; for God took him.

5:25 And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat
Lamech.

5:26 And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty
and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:27 And all the days of
Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

5:28 And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a
son: 5:29 And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort
us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the LORD hath cursed.

5:30 And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:31 And all the days of Lamech
were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

5:32 And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham,
and Japheth.

6:1 And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
earth, and daughters were born unto them, 6:2 That the sons of God saw
the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose.

6:3 And the LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.

6:4 There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
renown.

6:5 And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.

6:6 And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart.

6:7 And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the
face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and
the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.

6:8 But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.

6:9 These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect
in his generations, and Noah walked with God.

6:10 And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

6:11 The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled
with violence.

6:12 And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

6:13 And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me;
for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I
will destroy them with the earth.

6:14 Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

6:15 And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length
of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty
cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

6:16 A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side
thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.

6:17 And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the
earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under
heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.

6:18 But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come
into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives
with thee.

6:19 And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt
thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be
male and female.

6:20 Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort
shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21 And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22 Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did
he.

7:1 And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the
ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

7:2 Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and
his female.

7:3 Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to
keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

7:4 For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have
made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.

7:5 And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.

7:6 And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth.

7:7 And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8 Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 There went in two
and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had
commanded Noah.

7:10 And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.

7:11 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains
of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

7:12 And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13 In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth,
the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons
with them, into the ark; 7:14 They, and every beast after his kind,
and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind,
every bird of every sort.

7:15 And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16 And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in.

7:17 And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

7:18 And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the
earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

7:19 And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the
high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

7:20 Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains
were covered.

7:21 And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and
of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth, and every man: 7:22 All in whose nostrils was the
breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

7:23 And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face
of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the
fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah
only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24 And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.

8:1 And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over
the earth, and the waters asswaged; 8:2 The fountains also of the deep
and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was
restrained; 8:3 And the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the
waters were abated.

8:4 And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.

8:5 And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the
tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the
mountains seen.

8:6 And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the
window of the ark which he had made: 8:7 And he sent forth a raven,
which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off
the earth.

8:8 Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground; 8:9 But the dove found no rest
for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for
the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his
hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

8:10 And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the
dove out of the ark; 8:11 And the dove came in to him in the evening;
and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that
the waters were abated from off the earth.

8:12 And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.

8:13 And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from
off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked,
and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

8:14 And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, was the earth dried.

8:15 And God spake unto Noah, saying, 8:16 Go forth of the ark, thou,
and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

8:17 Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of
all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the
earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

8:18 And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him: 8:19 Every beast, every creeping thing, and every
fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went
forth out of the ark.

8:20 And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every clean
beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
altar.

8:21 And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his
heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I
again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.

8:22 While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

9:1 And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2 And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast
of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are
they delivered.

9:3 Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have I given you all things.

9:4 But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall
ye not eat.

9:5 And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of
every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
every man's brother will I require the life of man.

9:6 Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
the image of God made he man.

9:7 And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in
the earth, and multiply therein.

9:8 And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 9:9 And
I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after
you; 9:10 And with every living creature that is with you, of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from
all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

9:11 And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall
there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

9:12 And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for
perpetual generations: 9:13 I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall
be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

9:14 And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 And I will remember my
covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all
flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all
flesh.

9:16 And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that
I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living
creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17 And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which
I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18 And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and
Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.

9:19 These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth
overspread.

9:20 And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
9:21 And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered
within his tent.

9:22 And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
and told his two brethren without.

9:23 And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness.

9:24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had
done unto him.

9:25 And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

9:26 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be
his servant.

9:27 God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of
Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

9:28 And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29 And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and
he died.

10:1 Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and
Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

10:2 The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

10:3 And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

10:4 And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and
Dodanim.

10:5 By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands;
every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

10:6 And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.

10:7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah,
and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

10:8 And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

10:9 He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said,
Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.

10:10 And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

10:11 Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the
city Rehoboth, and Calah, 10:12 And Resen between Nineveh and Calah:
the same is a great city.

10:13 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
10:14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and
Caphtorim.

10:15 And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, 10:16 And the
Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite, 10:17 And the Hivite,
and the Arkite, and the Sinite, 10:18 And the Arvadite, and the
Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the
Canaanites spread abroad.

10:19 And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest
to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and
Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.

10:20 These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their
tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

10:21 Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the
brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

10:22 The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud,
and Aram.

10:23 And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.

10:24 And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.

10:25 And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for
in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.

10:26 And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and
Jerah, 10:27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, 10:28 And Obal, and
Abimael, and Sheba, 10:29 And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these
were the sons of Joktan.

10:30 And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a
mount of the east.

10:31 These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided
in the earth after the flood.

11:1 And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

11:2 And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they
found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.

11:3 And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn
them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for
morter.

11:4 And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose
top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

11:5 And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of men builded.

11:6 And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all
one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be
restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.

11:7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another's speech.

11:8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of
all the earth: and they left off to build the city.

11:9 Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did
there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the
LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

11:10 These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years
old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood: 11:11 And Shem
lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and
daughters.

11:12 And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah: 11:13
And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years,
and begat sons and daughters.

11:14 And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber: 11:15 And Salah
lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:16 And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg: 11:17 And
Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and
begat sons and daughters.

11:18 And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu: 11:19 And Peleg
lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:20 And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug: 11:21 And
Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat
sons and daughters.

11:22 And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor: 11:23 And Serug
lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and
daughters.

11:24 And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah: 11:25
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years,
and begat sons and daughters.

11:26 And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and
Haran.

11:27 Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram,
Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.

11:28 And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his
nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.

11:29 And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife
was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of
Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.

11:30 But Sarai was barren; she had no child.

11:31 And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's
son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they
went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of
Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.

11:32 And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah
died in Haran.

12:1 Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country,
and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I
will shew thee: 12:2 And I will make of thee a great nation, and I
will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a
blessing: 12:3 And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed.

12:4 So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot went
with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed
out of Haran.

12:5 And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all
their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had
gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan;
and into the land of Canaan they came.

12:6 And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto
the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.

12:7 And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I
give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who
appeared unto him.

12:8 And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel,
and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east:
and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and called upon the name
of the LORD.

12:9 And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.

12:10 And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into
Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.

12:11 And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt,
that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a
fair woman to look upon: 12:12 Therefore it shall come to pass, when
the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife:
and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

12:13 Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with
me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

12:14 And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the
Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.

12:15 The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before
Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.

12:16 And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and
oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses,
and camels.

12:17 And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of Sarai Abram's wife.

12:18 And Pharaoh called Abram and said, What is this that thou hast
done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?  12:19
Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to
wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

12:20 And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him
away, and his wife, and all that he had.

13:1 And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he
had, and Lot with him, into the south.

13:2 And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

13:3 And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto
the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and
Hai; 13:4 Unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the
first: and there Abram called on the name of the LORD.

13:5 And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and
tents.

13:6 And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell
together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell
together.

13:7 And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and
the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite
dwelled then in the land.

13:8 And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be
brethren.

13:9 Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee,
from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right;
or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

13:10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan,
that it was well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt,
as thou comest unto Zoar.

13:11 Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed
east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.

13:12 Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the
cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.

13:13 But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD
exceedingly.

13:14 And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from
him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 13:15 For all
the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for
ever.

13:16 And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a
man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be
numbered.

13:17 Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the
breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

13:18 Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of
Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.

14:1 And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar,
Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of
nations; 14:2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with
Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.

14:3 All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is
the salt sea.

14:4 Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year
they rebelled.

14:5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that
were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the
Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim, 14:6 And the
Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.

14:7 And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and
smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that
dwelt in Hazezontamar.

14:8 And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah,
and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela
(the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of
Siddim; 14:9 With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king
of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar;
four kings with five.

14:10 And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of
Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled
to the mountain.

14:11 And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their
victuals, and went their way.

14:12 And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom,
and his goods, and departed.

14:13 And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew;
for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and
brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.

14:14 And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.

14:15 And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by
night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the
left hand of Damascus.

14:16 And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

14:17 And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from
the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at
the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.

14:18 And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and
he was the priest of the most high God.

14:19 And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high
God, possessor of heaven and earth: 14:20 And blessed be the most high
God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him
tithes of all.

14:21 And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and
take the goods to thyself.

14:22 And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand
unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23 That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and
that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say,
I have made Abram rich: 14:24 Save only that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol,
and Mamre; let them take their portion.

15:1 After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a
vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward.

15:2 And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go
childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?
15:3 And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo,
one born in my house is mine heir.

15:4 And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This
shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own
bowels shall be thine heir.

15:5 And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he
said unto him, So shall thy seed be.

15:6 And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for
righteousness.

15:7 And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of Ur
of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

15:8 And he said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit
it?  15:9 And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon.

15:10 And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst,
and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

15:11 And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them
away.

15:12 And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram;
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

15:13 And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be
a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve them; and
they shall afflict them four hundred years; 15:14 And also that
nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they
come out with great substance.

15:15 And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried
in a good old age.

15:16 But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

15:17 And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was
dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between
those pieces.

15:18 In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying,
Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the
great river, the river Euphrates: 15:19 The Kenites, and the
Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites, 15:20 And the Hittites, and the
Perizzites, and the Rephaims, 15:21 And the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.

16:1 Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an
handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

16:2 And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained
me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may
obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

16:3 And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after
Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her
husband Abram to be his wife.

16:4 And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw
that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

16:5 And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was
despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee.

16:6 But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do
to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she
fled from her face.

16:7 And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the
wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

16:8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither
wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.

16:9 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress,
and submit thyself under her hands.

16:10 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy
seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with
child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because
the LORD hath heard thy affliction.

16:12 And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man,
and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence
of all his brethren.

16:13 And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou
God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that
seeth me?  16:14 Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold,
it is between Kadesh and Bered.

16:15 And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name,
which Hagar bare, Ishmael.

16:16 And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare
Ishmael to Abram.

17:1 And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared
to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

17:2 And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3 And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying, 17:4
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
father of many nations.

17:5 Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name
shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.

17:6 And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations
of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7 And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8 And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an
everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

17:9 And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10 This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and
thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11 And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

17:12 And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or
bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

17:13 He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting covenant.

17:14 And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath
broken my covenant.

17:15 And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.

17:16 And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people
shall be of her.

17:17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?  17:18 And Abraham
said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!  17:19 And God
said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call
his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20 And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

17:21 But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

17:22 And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.

17:23 And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

17:24 And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:25 And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:26 In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his
son.

17:27 And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.

18:1 And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day; 18:2 And he lift up his eyes
and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he
ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the
ground, 18:3 And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy
sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant: 18:4 Let a little
water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
under the tree: 18:5 And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort
ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come
to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.

18:6 And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes
upon the hearth.

18:7 And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good,
and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

18:8 And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they
did eat.

18:9 And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said,
Behold, in the tent.

18:10 And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the
time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah
heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

18:11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.

18:12 Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed
old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?  18:13 And the LORD
said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a
surety bear a child, which am old?  18:14 Is any thing too hard for
the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to
the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.

18:15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid.
And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16 And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and
Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

18:17 And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I
do; 18:18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty
nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
18:19 For I know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do
justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which
he hath spoken of him.

18:20 And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great, and because their sin is very grievous; 18:21 I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of
it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.

18:22 And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward
Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.

18:23 And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?  18:24 Peradventure there be fifty
righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the
place for the fifty righteous that are therein?  18:25 That be far
from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?  18:26 And
the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city,
then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

18:27 And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me
to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes: 18:28
Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there
forty and five, I will not destroy it.

18:29 And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there
shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's
sake.

18:30 And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will
speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I
will not do it, if I find thirty there.

18:31 And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
LORD: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I
will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

18:32 And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak yet
but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I
will not destroy it for ten's sake.

18:33 And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with
Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.

19:1 And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the
gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed
himself with his face toward the ground; 19:2 And he said, Behold now,
my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry
all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on
your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all
night.

19:3 And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him,
and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake
unleavened bread, and they did eat.

19:4 But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of
Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people
from every quarter: 19:5 And they called unto Lot, and said unto him,
Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out
unto us, that we may know them.

19:6 And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after
him, 19:7 And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

19:8 Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let
me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good
in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they
under the shadow of my roof.

19:9 And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow
came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal
worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man,
even Lot, and came near to break the door.

19:10 But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house
to them, and shut to the door.

19:11 And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to
find the door.

19:12 And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in
law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the
city, bring them out of this place: 19:13 For we will destroy this
place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the
LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it.

19:14 And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married
his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD
will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons
in law.

19:15 And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot,
saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here;
lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

19:16 And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon
the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD
being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him
without the city.

19:17 And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad,
that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay
thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

19:18 And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD: 19:19 Behold now,
thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy
mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot
escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die: 19:20
Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one:
Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall
live.

19:21 And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this
thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou
hast spoken.

19:22 Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou
be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

19:23 The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

19:24 Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and
fire from the LORD out of heaven; 19:25 And he overthrew those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
which grew upon the ground.

19:26 But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.

19:27 And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the LORD: 19:28 And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke
of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29 And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.

19:30 And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his
two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt
in a cave, he and his two daughters.

19:31 And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and
there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of
all the earth: 19:32 Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we
will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

19:33 And they made their father drink wine that night: and the
firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when
she lay down, nor when she arose.

19:34 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto
the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him
drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we
may preserve seed of our father.

19:35 And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the
younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay
down, nor when she arose.

19:36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.

19:37 And the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab: the
same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.

19:38 And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name
Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this
day.

20:1 And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and
dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.

20:2 And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and
Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

20:3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
for she is a man's wife.

20:4 But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt thou
slay also a righteous nation?  20:5 Said he not unto me, She is my
sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the
integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.

20:6 And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst
this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from
sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

20:7 Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and
he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her
not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are
thine.

20:8 Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
sore afraid.

20:9 Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou
done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on
me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that
ought not to be done.

20:10 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou
hast done this thing?  20:11 And Abraham said, Because I thought,
Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for
my wife's sake.

20:12 And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

20:13 And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my
father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou
shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me,
He is my brother.

20:14 And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his
wife.

20:15 And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where
it pleaseth thee.

20:16 And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the
eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was
reproved.

20:17 So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.

21:1 And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto
Sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which God had spoken to him.

21:3 And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

21:4 And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as
God had commanded him.

21:5 And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born
unto him.

21:6 And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
will laugh with me.

21:7 And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should
have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.

21:8 And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great
feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.

21:9 And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born
unto Abraham, mocking.

21:10 Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her
son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with Isaac.

21:11 And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of
his son.

21:12 And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy
seed be called.

21:13 And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder,
and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in
the wilderness of Beersheba.

21:15 And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.

21:16 And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off,
as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the
child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

21:17 And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called
to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar?
fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

21:18 Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will
make him a great nation.

21:19 And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20 And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer.

21:21 And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him
a wife out of the land of Egypt.

21:22 And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the
chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee
in all that thou doest: 21:23 Now therefore swear unto me here by God
that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son's son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24 And Abraham said, I will swear.

21:25 And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which
Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

21:26 And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing; neither
didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.

21:27 And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.

21:28 And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

21:29 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs
which thou hast set by themselves?  21:30 And he said, For these seven
ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto
me, that I have digged this well.

21:31 Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they
sware both of them.

21:32 Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up,
and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the
land of the Philistines.

21:33 And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on
the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.

21:34 And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.

22:1 And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt
Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

22:2 And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

22:3 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave
the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which God had told him.

22:4 Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.

22:5 And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass;
and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and
he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 And Abraham said, My
son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay
his son.

22:11 And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and
said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

22:12 And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

22:13 And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind
him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his
son.

22:14 And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is
said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.

22:15 And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the
second time, 22:16 And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD,
for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,
thine only son: 22:17 That in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and
as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies; 22:18 And in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

22:19 So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and
went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.

22:20 And it came to pass after these things, that it was told
Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy
brother Nahor; 22:21 Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and
Kemuel the father of Aram, 22:22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash,
and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

22:23 And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor,
Abraham's brother.

22:24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah,
and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.

23:1 And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these
were the years of the life of Sarah.

23:2 And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of
Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.

23:3 And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the
sons of Heth, saying, 23:4 I am a stranger and a sojourner with you:
give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my
dead out of my sight.

23:5 And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, 23:6
Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of
our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his
sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

23:7 And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the
land, even to the children of Heth.

23:8 And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I
should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to
Ephron the son of Zohar, 23:9 That he may give me the cave of
Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as
much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a
buryingplace amongst you.

23:10 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the
Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even
of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 23:11 Nay, my
lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I
give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee:
bury thy dead.

23:12 And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

23:13 And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the
land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will
give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead
there.

23:14 And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him, 23:15 My lord,
hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver;
what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

23:16 And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron
the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth,
four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

23:17 And the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was before
Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees
that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were
made sure 23:18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the
children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.

23:19 And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the
field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of
Canaan.

23:20 And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.

24:1 And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had
blessed Abraham in all things.

24:2 And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3
And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell: 24:4 But thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
Isaac.

24:5 And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be
willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again
unto the land from whence thou camest?  24:6 And Abraham said unto
him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7 The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send
his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence.

24:8 And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

24:9 And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his
master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

24:10 And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he
arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.

24:11 And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well
of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out
to draw water.

24:12 And he said O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send
me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.

24:13 Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 And let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I
pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give
thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed
kindness unto my master.

24:15 And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold,
Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of
Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16 And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had
any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her
pitcher, and came up.

24:17 And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee,
drink a little water of thy pitcher.

24:18 And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

24:19 And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw
water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

24:20 And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran
again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

24:21 And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the
LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.

24:22 And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the
man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 24:23 And said, Whose
daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's
house for us to lodge in?  24:24 And she said unto him, I am the
daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

24:25 She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodge in.

24:26 And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.

24:27 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who
hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being
in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren.

24:28 And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.

24:29 And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran
out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30 And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon
his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister,
saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and,
behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

24:31 And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore
standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the
camels.

24:32 And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and
gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet,
and the men's feet that were with him.

24:33 And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will
not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.

24:34 And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

24:35 And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become
great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold,
and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

24:36 And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was
old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

24:37 And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife
to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:
24:38 But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and
take a wife unto my son.

24:39 And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not
follow me.

24:40 And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his
angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for
my son of my kindred, and of my father's house: 24:41 Then shalt thou
be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if
they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42 And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my
master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go: 24:43
Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that
when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me,
I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink; 24:44 And she say
to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the
same be the woman whom the LORD hath appointed out for my master's
son.

24:45 And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah
came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto
the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray
thee.

24:46 And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank,
and she made the camels drink also.

24:47 And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she
said, the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him:
and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

24:48 And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed
the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

24:49 And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.

24:50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth
from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51 Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be
thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.

24:52 And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their
words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.

24:53 And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her
brother and to her mother precious things.

24:54 And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him,
and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said,
Send me away unto my master.

24:55 And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with
us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

24:56 And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath
prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

24:57 And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her
mouth.

24:58 And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with
this man? And she said, I will go.

24:59 And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
Abraham's servant, and his men.

24:60 And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed
possess the gate of those which hate them.

24:61 And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went
his way.

24:62 And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.

24:63 And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and
he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

24:64 And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she
lighted off the camel.

24:65 For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh
in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master:
therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

24:66 And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.

24:67 And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took
Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was
comforted after his mother's death.

25:1 Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.

25:2 And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and
Ishbak, and Shuah.

25:3 And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were
Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.

25:4 And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah,
and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.

25:5 And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.

25:6 But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham
gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived,
eastward, unto the east country.

25:7 And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he
lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

25:8 Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

25:9 And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of
Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which
is before Mamre; 25:10 The field which Abraham purchased of the sons
of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

25:11 And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed
his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.

25:12 Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom
Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham: 25:13 And
these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according
to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar,
and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 25:14 And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa, 25:15
Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah: 25:16 These are the sons
of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

25:17 And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and
thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gathered unto his people.

25:18 And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as
thou goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his
brethren.

25:19 And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham
begat Isaac: 25:20 And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah
to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister
to Laban the Syrian.

25:21 And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was
barren: and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife
conceived.

25:22 And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If
it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD.

25:23 And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serve the younger.

25:24 And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there
were twins in her womb.

25:25 And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and
they called his name Esau.

25:26 And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore
years old when she bare them.

25:27 And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

25:28 And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but
Rebekah loved Jacob.

25:29 And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was
faint: 25:30 And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that
same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.

25:31 And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.

25:32 And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit
shall this birthright do to me?  25:33 And Jacob said, Swear to me
this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
Jacob.

25:34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his
birthright.

26:1 And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that
was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the
Philistines unto Gerar.

26:2 And the LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt;
dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of: 26:3 Sojourn in this
land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and
unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the
oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father; 26:4 And I will make thy
seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; 26:5 Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept
my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

26:6 And Isaac dwelt in Gerar: 26:7 And the men of the place asked him
of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She
is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for
Rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.

26:8 And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.

26:9 And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is
thy wife; and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto
him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.

26:10 And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of
the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest
have brought guiltiness upon us.

26:11 And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

26:12 Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
hundredfold: and the LORD blessed him.

26:13 And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he
became very great: 26:14 For he had possession of flocks, and
possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines
envied him.

26:15 For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the
days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and
filled them with earth.

26:16 And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much
mightier than we.

26:17 And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of
Gerar, and dwelt there.

26:18 And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged
in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped
them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the
names by which his father had called them.

26:19 And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a
well of springing water.

26:20 And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen,
saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek;
because they strove with him.

26:21 And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it Sitnah.

26:22 And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he
said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 And he went up from thence to Beersheba.

26:24 And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am
the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

26:25 And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's servants digged a
well.

26:26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his
friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.

26:27 And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me away from you?  26:28 And they said, We saw
certainly that the LORD was with thee: and we said, Let there be now
an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a
covenant with thee; 26:29 That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not
touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have
sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the LORD.

26:30 And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

26:31 And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to
another: and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in
peace.

26:32 And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came,
and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, We have found water.

26:33 And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is
Beersheba unto this day.

26:34 And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the
Hittite: 26:35 Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.

27:1 And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were
dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said
unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I.

27:2 And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my
death: 27:3 Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver
and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4
And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I
may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.

27:5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

27:6 And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy
father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying, 27:7 Bring me venison, and
make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the LORD
before my death.

27:8 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I
command thee.

27:9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as
he loveth: 27:10 And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may
eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.

27:11 And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is
a hairy man, and I am a smooth man: 27:12 My father peradventure will
feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing.

27:13 And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only
obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

27:14 And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and
his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.

27:15 And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:
27:16 And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his neck: 27:17 And she gave the savoury meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.

27:18 And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said,
Here am I; who art thou, my son?  27:19 And Jacob said unto his
father, I am Esau thy first born; I have done according as thou badest
me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

27:20 And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD thy God brought it
to me.

27:21 And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.

27:22 And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and
said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.

27:23 And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother Esau's hands: so he blessed him.

27:24 And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.

27:25 And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me,
my son.

27:27 And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of
his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the LORD hath blessed: 27:28 Therefore God
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 Let people serve thee, and nations bow
down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of
blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.

27:31 And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

27:32 And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I
am thy son, thy firstborn Esau.

27:33 And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he
that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all
before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be
blessed.

27:34 And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me,
even me also, O my father.

27:35 And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away
thy blessing.

27:36 And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and,
behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me?  27:37 And Isaac answered and said unto
Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I
given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained
him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?  27:38 And Esau said
unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even
me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

27:39 And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven
from above; 27:40 And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve
thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the
dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

27:41 And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning
for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.

27:42 And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and
she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold,
thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to
kill thee.

27:43 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to Laban
my brother to Haran; 27:44 And tarry with him a few days, until thy
brother's fury turn away; 27:45 Until thy brother's anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I will
send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you
both in one day?  27:46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my
life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the
daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 And Isaac called Jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of Canaan.

28:2 Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of Laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 And give thee
the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave
unto Abraham.

28:5 And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban,
son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's
mother.

28:6 When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to
Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughers of Canaan; 28:7 And that Jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to Padanaram; 28:8 And Esau seeing that the
daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father; 28:9 Then went Esau
unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his
wife.

28:10 And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.

28:11 And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending
and descending on it.

28:13 And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 And thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I
will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to
thee of.

28:16 And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the LORD
is in this place; and I knew it not.

28:17 And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is
none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

28:18 And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that
he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil
upon the top of it.

28:19 And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of
that city was called Luz at the first.

28:20 And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, 28:21 So that I come again to my father's house in
peace; then shall the LORD be my God: 28:22 And this stone, which I
have set for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou
shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.

29:1 Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east.

29:2 And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they
watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

29:3 And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the
stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone
again upon the well's mouth in his place.

29:4 And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they
said, Of Haran are we.

29:5 And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they
said, We know him.

29:6 And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well:
and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.

29:7 And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the
cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and
feed them.

29:8 And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered
together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we
water the sheep.

29:9 And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she kept them.

29:10 And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban
his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother,
that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and
watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.

29:11 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.

29:12 And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that
he was Rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.

29:13 And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his
sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed
him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.

29:14 And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And
he abode with him the space of a month.

29:15 And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother,
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy
wages be?  29:16 And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder
was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.

29:17 Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well
favoured.

29:18 And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years
for Rachel thy younger daughter.

29:19 And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that
I should give her to another man: abide with me.

29:20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto
him but a few days, for the love he had to her.

29:21 And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

29:22 And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a
feast.

29:23 And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his
daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

29:24 And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an
handmaid.

29:25 And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah:
and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I
serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
29:26 And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give
the younger before the firstborn.

29:27 Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service
which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.

29:28 And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel
his daughter to wife also.

29:29 And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be
her maid.

29:30 And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more
than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.

29:31 And when the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb:
but Rachel was barren.

29:32 And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath looked upon my affliction;
now therefore my husband will love me.

29:33 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the
LORD hath heard I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also:
and she called his name Simeon.

29:34 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time
will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons:
therefore was his name called Levi.

29:35 And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will
I praise the LORD: therefore she called his name Judah; and left
bearing.

30:1 And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel
envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I
die.

30:2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I
in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.

30:4 And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in
unto her.

30:5 And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.

30:6 And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.

30:7 And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second
son.

30:8 And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my
sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.

30:9 When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her
maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.

30:10 And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son.

30:11 And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.

30:12 And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son.

30:13 And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me
blessed: and she called his name Asher.

30:14 And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then
Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

30:15 And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken
my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And
Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's
mandrakes.

30:16 And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went
out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I
have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that
night.

30:17 And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob
the fifth son.

30:18 And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given
my maiden to my husband: and she called his name Issachar.

30:19 And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.

30:20 And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she
called his name Zebulun.

30:21 And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.

30:22 And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened
her womb.

30:23 And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away
my reproach: 30:24 And she called his name Joseph; and said, The LORD
shall add to me another son.

30:25 And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob
said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.

30:27 And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in
thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the LORD hath
blessed me for thy sake.

30:28 And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.

30:29 And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and
how thy cattle was with me.

30:30 For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now
increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath blessed thee since my
coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?  30:31
And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not
give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again
feed and keep thy flock.

30:32 I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence
all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among
the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such
shall be my hire.

30:33 So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it
shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled
and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be
counted stolen with me.

30:34 And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy
word.

30:35 And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and
every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the
sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.

30:36 And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and
Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.

30:37 And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
appear which was in the rods.

30:38 And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that
they should conceive when they came to drink.

30:39 And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth
cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.

30:40 And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the
flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of
Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto
Laban's cattle.

30:41 And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did
conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in
the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.

30:42 But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the
feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.

30:43 And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

31:1 And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken
away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's
hath he gotten all this glory.

31:2 And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.

31:3 And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.

31:4 And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his
flock, 31:5 And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that
it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with
me.

31:6 And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.

31:7 And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;
but God suffered him not to hurt me.

31:8 If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the
cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be
thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

31:9 Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given
them to me.

31:10 And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that
I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which
leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

31:11 And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob:
And I said, Here am I.

31:12 And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which
leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I
have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.

31:13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this
land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.

31:14 And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any
portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?  31:15 Are we not
counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured
also our money.

31:16 For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
Padanaram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.

31:19 And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.

31:20 And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

31:21 So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over
the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.

31:22 And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.

31:23 And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.

31:24 And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

31:25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the
mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.

31:26 And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives
taken with the sword?  31:27 Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly,
and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent
thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou
hast now done foolishly in so doing.

31:29 It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that
thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

31:30 And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my
gods?  31:31 And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was
afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.

31:32 With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before
our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.

31:33 And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into
the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out
of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.

31:34 Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but
found them not.

31:35 And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I
cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he
searched but found not the images.

31:36 And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered
and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast
so hotly pursued after me?  31:37 Whereas thou hast searched all my
stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here
before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us
both.

31:38 This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not
eaten.

31:39 That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of
Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and
let it be for a witness between me and thee.

31:45 And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

31:46 And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took
stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

31:47 And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.

31:48 And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this
day.

Therefore was the name of it called Galeed; 31:49 And Mizpah; for he
said, The LORD watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another.

31:50 If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 This heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their
father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father
Isaac.

31:54 Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.

32:2 And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim.

32:3 And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the
land of Seir, the country of Edom.

32:4 And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord
Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and
stayed there until now: 32:5 And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and
menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that
I may find grace in thy sight.

32:6 And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy
brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 And said, If Esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
Isaac, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: 32:10 I am not worthy of
the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan;
and now I am become two bands.

32:11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the children.

32:12 And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

32:13 And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came
to his hand a present for Esau his brother; 32:14 Two hundred she
goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, 32:15
Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls,
twenty she asses, and ten foals.

32:16 And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove
by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and
put a space betwixt drove and drove.

32:17 And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither
goest thou? and whose are these before thee?  32:18 Then thou shalt
say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord
Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

32:19 And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that
followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau,
when ye find him.

32:20 And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For
he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and
afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.

32:21 So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that
night in the company.

32:22 And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.

32:23 And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.

32:24 And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day.

32:25 And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him.

32:26 And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27 And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.

32:28 And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel:
for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast
prevailed.

32:29 And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name.
And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he
blessed him there.

32:30 And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen
God face to face, and my life is preserved.

32:31 And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halted upon his thigh.

32:32 Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because
he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

33:1 And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came,
and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah,
and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

33:2 And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah
and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.

33:3 And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

33:4 And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him: and they wept.

33:5 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God
hath graciously given thy servant.

33:6 Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
bowed themselves.

33:7 And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.

33:8 And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And
he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have
seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast
pleased with me.

33:11 Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because
God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he
urged him, and he took it.

33:12 And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will
go before thee.

33:13 And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men
should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

33:14 Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and
the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.

33:15 And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that
are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the
sight of my lord.

33:16 So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.

33:17 And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made
booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called
Succoth.

33:18 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the
land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent
before the city.

33:19 And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent,
at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred
pieces of money.

33:20 And he erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.

34:1 And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land.

34:2 And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

34:3 And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved
the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.

34:4 And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this
damsel to wife.

34:5 And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his
sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until
they were come.

34:6 And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune
with him.

34:7 And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it:
and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had
wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter: which thing
ought not to be done.

34:8 And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem
longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.

34:9 And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us,
and take our daughters unto you.

34:10 And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you;
dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.

34:11 And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.

34:12 Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according
as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

34:13 And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:
34:14 And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our
sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
34:15 But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be,
that every male of you be circumcised; 34:16 Then will we give our
daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will
dwell with you, and we will become one people.

34:17 But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will
we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

34:18 And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.

34:19 And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the
house of his father.

34:20 And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city,
and communed with the men of their city, saying, 34:21 These men are
peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade
therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us
take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our
daughters.

34:22 Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us,
to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised.

34:23 Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us.

34:24 And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went
out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that
went out of the gate of his city.

34:25 And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that
two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each
man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.

34:26 And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the
sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.

34:27 The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister.

34:28 They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
which was in the city, and that which was in the field, 34:29 And all
their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they
captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

34:30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites
and the Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall gather
themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed,
I and my house.

34:31 And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
35:1 And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

35:2 Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with
him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and
change your garments: 35:3 And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and
I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my
distress, and was with me in the way which I went.

35:4 And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their
hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid
them under the oak which was by Shechem.

35:5 And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of
Jacob.

35:6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is,
Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

35:7 And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel:
because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his
brother.

35:8 But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.

35:9 And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name Israel.

35:11 And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 And the land which I gave
Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will I give the land.

35:13 And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

35:15 And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him,
Bethel.

35:16 And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

35:17 And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

35:18 And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she
died) that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him
Benjamin.

35:19 And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is
Bethlehem.

35:20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
Rachel's grave unto this day.

35:21 And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of
Edar.

35:22 And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben
went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel heard it.
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve: 35:23 The sons of Leah; Reuben,
Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and
Zebulun: 35:24 The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin: 35:25 And the
sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali: 35:26 And the
sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of
Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram.

35:27 And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city
of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

35:28 And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

35:29 And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people, being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried
him.

36:1 Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.

36:2 Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter
of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter
of Zibeon the Hivite; 36:3 And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of
Nebajoth.

36:4 And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel; 36:5 And
Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons of
Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.

36:6 And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all
the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all
his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into
the country from the face of his brother Jacob.

36:7 For their riches were more than that they might dwell together;
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because
of their cattle.

36:8 Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.

36:9 And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites
in mount Seir: 36:10 These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the
son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of
Esau.

36:11 And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and
Kenaz.

36:12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to
Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife.

36:13 And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and
Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.

36:14 And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the
daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and
Jaalam, and Korah.

36:15 These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the
firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
36:16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes
that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.

36:17 And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke
Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of
Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau's
wife.

36:18 And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush,
duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah
the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.

36:19 These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their
dukes.

36:20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land;
Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, 36:21 And Dishon, and Ezer,
and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir
in the land of Edom.

36:22 And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's
sister was Timna.

36:23 And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and
Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.

36:24 And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this
was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the
asses of Zibeon his father.

36:25 And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the
daughter of Anah.

36:26 And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and
Ithran, and Cheran.

36:27 The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.

36:28 The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.

36:29 These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke
Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah, 36:30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke
Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in
the land of Seir.

36:31 And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before
there reigned any king over the children of Israel.

36:32 And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his
city was Dinhabah.

36:33 And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in
his stead.

36:34 And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his
stead.

36:35 And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in
the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was
Avith.

36:36 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.

36:37 And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.

36:38 And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his
stead.

36:39 And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his
stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was
Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

36:40 And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau,
according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth, 36:41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah,
duke Pinon, 36:42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, 36:43 Duke
Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according to their
habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the father of
the Edomites.

37:1 And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in
the land of Canaan.

37:2 These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and
Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

37:3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he
was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

37:4 And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than
all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto
him.

37:5 And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they
hated him yet the more.

37:6 And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have
dreamed: 37:7 For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and,
lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

37:8 And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or
shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the
more for his dreams, and for his words.

37:9 And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and
said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and
the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.

37:10 And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his
father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou
hast dreamed?  Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to
bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?  37:11 And his brethren
envied him; but his father observed the saying.

37:12 And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.

37:13 And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock
in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him,
Here am I.

37:14 And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with
thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he
sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

37:15 And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in
the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?  37:16
And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed
their flocks.

37:17 And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say,
Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found
them in Dothan.

37:18 And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto
them, they conspired against him to slay him.

37:19 And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.

37:20 Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some
pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall
see what will become of his dreams.

37:21 And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands;
and said, Let us not kill him.

37:22 And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might
rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.

37:23 And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren,
that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that
was on him; 37:24 And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the
pit was empty, there was no water in it.

37:25 And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes
and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead
with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry
it down to Egypt.

37:26 And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay
our brother, and conceal his blood?  37:27 Come, and let us sell him
to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our
brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.

37:28 Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites
for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.

37:29 And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in
the pit; and he rent his clothes.

37:30 And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not;
and I, whither shall I go?  37:31 And they took Joseph's coat, and
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood; 37:32 And
they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their
father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
coat or no.

37:33 And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast
hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

37:34 And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.

37:35 And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into
the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.

37:36 And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer
of Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

38:1 And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his
brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.

38:2 And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name
was Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.

38:3 And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.

38:4 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name
Onan.

38:5 And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name
Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.

38:6 And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.

38:7 And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD;
and the LORD slew him.

38:8 And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and
marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.

38:9 And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to
pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it on
the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.

38:10 And the thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he
slew him also.

38:11 Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at
thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest
peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and
dwelt in her father's house.

38:12 And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife died;
and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to
Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.

38:13 And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up
to Timnath to shear his sheep.

38:14 And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her
with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is
by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was
not given unto him to wife.

38:15 When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she
had covered her face.

38:16 And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee,
let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter
in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come
in unto me?  38:17 And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock.
And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?  38:18
And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet,
and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he gave it
her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.

38:19 And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and
put on the garments of her widowhood.

38:20 And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite,
to receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not.

38:21 Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the
harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no
harlot in this place.

38:22 And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also
the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.

38:23 And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed:
behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.

38:24 And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told
Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and
also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her
forth, and let her be burnt.

38:25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law,
saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said,
Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and
staff.

38:26 And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more
righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he
knew her again no more.

38:27 And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold,
twins were in her womb.

38:28 And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out
his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet
thread, saying, This came out first.

38:29 And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his
brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this
breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez.

38:30 And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread
upon his hand: and his name was called Zarah.

39:1 And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of
Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of
the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

39:2 And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he
was in the house of his master the Egyptian.

39:3 And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD
made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

39:4 And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he
made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his
hand.

39:5 And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer
in his house, and over all that he had, that the LORD blessed the
Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the LORD was
upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

39:6 And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not
ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly
person, and well favoured.

39:7 And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife
cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.

39:8 But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my
master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed
all that he hath to my hand; 39:9 There is none greater in this house
than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God?  39:10 And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by
day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

39:11 And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the
house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house
there within.

39:12 And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he
left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

39:13 And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment
in her hand, and was fled forth, 39:14 That she called unto the men of
her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in an
Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I
cried with a loud voice: 39:15 And it came to pass, when he heard that
I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and
fled, and got him out.

39:16 And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.

39:17 And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The
Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to
mock me: 39:18 And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried,
that he left his garment with me, and fled out.

39:19 And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his
wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy
servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.

39:20 And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a
place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the
prison.

39:21 But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him
favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

39:22 And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the
prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he
was the doer of it.

39:23 The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under
his hand; because the LORD was with him, and that which he did, the
LORD made it to prosper.

40:1 And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the
king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.

40:2 And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the
chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

40:3 And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard,
into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.

40:4 And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he
served them: and they continued a season in ward.

40:5 And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one
night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the
butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the
prison.

40:6 And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.

40:7 And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of
his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?  40:8 And
they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no
interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.

40:9 And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him,
In my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 40:10 And in the vine were
three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot
forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 And
Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them
into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

40:12 And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The
three branches are three days: 40:13 Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou
shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner
when thou wast his butler.

40:14 But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew
kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh,
and bring me out of this house: 40:15 For indeed I was stolen away out
of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon.

40:16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he
said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three
white baskets on my head: 40:17 And in the uppermost basket there was
of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out
of the basket upon my head.

40:18 And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation
thereof: The three baskets are three days: 40:19 Yet within three days
shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a
tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

40:20 And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday,
that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head
of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.

40:21 And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and
he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand: 40:22 But he hanged the chief
baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.

40:23 Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.

41:1 And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh
dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

41:2 And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured
kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

41:3 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the
river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon
the brink of the river.

41:4 And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

41:5 And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears
of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

41:6 And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind
sprung up after them.

41:7 And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.
And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.

41:8 And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled;
and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the
wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none
that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.

41:9 Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember
my faults this day: 41:10 Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put
me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief
baker: 41:11 And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed
each man according to the interpretation of his dream.

41:12 And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to
the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us
our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.

41:13 And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he
restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

41:14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his
raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.

41:15 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there
is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou
canst understand a dream to interpret it.

41:16 And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall
give Pharaoh an answer of peace.

41:17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon
the bank of the river: 41:18 And, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a
meadow: 41:19 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor
and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the
land of Egypt for badness: 41:20 And the lean and the ill favoured
kine did eat up the first seven fat kine: 41:21 And when they had
eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.

41:22 And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one
stalk, full and good: 41:23 And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,
and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 And the
thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto the
magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

41:25 And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God
hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.

41:26 The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are
seven years: the dream is one.

41:27 And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them
are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind
shall be seven years of famine.

41:28 This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is
about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.

41:29 Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all
the land of Egypt: 41:30 And there shall arise after them seven years
of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land; 41:31 And the plenty shall not
be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall
be very grievous.

41:32 And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is
because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it
to pass.

41:33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and
set him over the land of Egypt.

41:34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous
years.

41:35 And let them gather all the food of those good years that come,
and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in
the cities.

41:36 And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land
perish not through the famine.

41:37 And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.

41:38 And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as
this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?  41:39 And Pharaoh said
unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 Thou shalt be over my house,
and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the
throne will I be greater than thou.

41:41 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the
land of Egypt.

41:42 And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a
gold chain about his neck; 41:43 And he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he
made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.

41:44 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee
shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.

41:45 And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave
him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And
Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.

41:46 And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh
king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and
went throughout all the land of Egypt.

41:47 And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
handfuls.

41:48 And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were
in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of
the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

41:49 And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he left numbering; for it was without number.

41:50 And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto
him.

41:51 And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

41:52 And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

41:53 And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of
Egypt, were ended.

41:54 And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph
had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of
Egypt there was bread.

41:55 And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to
Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto
Joseph; what he saith to you, do.

41:56 And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph
opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the
famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.

41:57 And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

42:1 Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto
his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?  42:2 And he said, Behold,
I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

42:3 And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.

42:4 But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren;
for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.

42:5 And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came:
for the famine was in the land of Canaan.

42:6 And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that
sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and
bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.

42:7 And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself
strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them,
Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.

42:8 And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

42:9 And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and
said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are
come.

42:10 And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
servants come.

42:11 We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no
spies.

42:12 And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land
ye are come.

42:13 And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one
man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with
our father, and one is not.

42:14 And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you,
saying, Ye are spies: 42:15 Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of
Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither.

42:16 Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any
truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.

42:17 And he put them all together into ward three days.

42:18 And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for
I fear God: 42:19 If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound
in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your
houses: 42:20 But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your
words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.

42:21 And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

42:22 And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying,
Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore,
behold, also his blood is required.

42:23 And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto
them by an interpreter.

42:24 And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to
them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and
bound him before their eyes.

42:25 Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to
restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision
for the way: and thus did he unto them.

42:26 And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

42:27 And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in
the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

42:28 And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it
is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?  42:29
And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and
told him all that befell unto them; saying, 42:30 The man, who is the
lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the
country.

42:31 And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 We
be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest
is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.

42:33 And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall
I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me,
and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone: 42:34
And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are
no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your
brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

42:35 And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold,
every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and
their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

42:36 And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my
children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin
away: all these things are against me.

42:37 And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I
bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him
to thee again.

42:38 And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in
the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to
the grave.

43:1 And the famine was sore in the land.

43:2 And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they
had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy
us a little food.

43:3 And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest
unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with
you.

43:4 If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy
thee food: 43:5 But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down:
for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your
brother be with you.

43:6 And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother?  43:7 And they said, The man
asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your
father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according
to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would
say, Bring your brother down?  43:8 And Judah said unto Israel his
father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may
live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.

43:9 I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I
bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the
blame for ever: 43:10 For except we had lingered, surely now we had
returned this second time.

43:11 And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do
this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry
down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and
myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 43:12 And take double money in your hand;
and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 43:13 Take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 And God
Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your
other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am
bereaved.

43:15 And the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and
stood before Joseph.

43:16 And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of
his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these
men shall dine with me at noon.

43:17 And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into
Joseph's house.

43:18 And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's
house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our
sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion
against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

43:19 And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they
communed with him at the door of the house, 43:20 And said, O sir, we
came indeed down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 And it came to
pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full
weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

43:22 And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food:
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

43:23 And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of
your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money.
And he brought Simeon out unto them.

43:24 And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them
water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

43:25 And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for
they heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26 And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the
earth.

43:27 And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?  43:28 And they
answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

43:29 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake
unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.

43:30 And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his
brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber,
and wept there.

43:31 And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and
said, Set on bread.

43:32 And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves,
and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because
the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an
abomination unto the Egyptians.

43:33 And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his
birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men
marvelled one at another.

43:34 And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but
Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. And they
drank, and were merry with him.

44:1 And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's
sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money
in his sack's mouth.

44:2 And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the
youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that
Joseph had spoken.

44:3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they
and their asses.

44:4 And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for
good?  44:5 Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

44:6 And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

44:7 And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God
forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: 44:8
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal
out of thy lord's house silver or gold?  44:9 With whomsoever of thy
servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's
bondmen.

44:10 And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

44:11 Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground,
and opened every man his sack.

44:12 And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the
youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.

44:13 Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
returned to the city.

44:14 And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was
yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

44:15 And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done?
wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?  44:16 And Judah
said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how
shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy
servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with
whom the cup is found.

44:17 And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in
whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you,
get you up in peace unto your father.

44:18 Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy
servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not
thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.

44:19 My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a
brother?  44:20 And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old
man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is
dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

44:21 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that
I may set mine eyes upon him.

44:22 And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for
if he should leave his father, his father would die.

44:23 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother
come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

44:24 And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father,
we told him the words of my lord.

44:25 And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.

44:26 And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with
us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except
our youngest brother be with us.

44:27 And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife
bare me two sons: 44:28 And the one went out from me, and I said,
Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since: 44:29 And if ye
take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down
my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

44:30 Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad
be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;
44:31 It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with
us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs
of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

44:32 For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father,
saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to
my father for ever.

44:33 Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the
lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

44:34 For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father.

45:1 Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood
by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there
stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his
brethren.

45:2 And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh
heard.

45:3 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father
yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubled at his presence.

45:4 And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you.
And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye
sold into Egypt.

45:5 Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye
sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.

45:6 For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet
there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor
harvest.

45:7 And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

45:8 So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath
made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of Egypt.

45:9 Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith
thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me,
tarry not: 45:10 And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou
shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11
And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine;
lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

45:12 And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin,
that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

45:13 And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all
that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

45:14 And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and
Benjamin wept upon his neck.

45:15 Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and
after that his brethren talked with him.

45:16 And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his
servants.

45:17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye;
lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan; 45:18 And
take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will
give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of
the land.

45:19 Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the
land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your
father, and come.

45:20 Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of
Egypt is your's.

45:21 And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons,
according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for
the way.

45:22 To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to
Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of
raiment.

45:23 And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden
with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and
bread and meat for his father by the way.

45:24 So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said
unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.

45:25 And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan
unto Jacob their father, 45:26 And told him, saying, Joseph is yet
alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived: 45:28 And Israel said,
It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before
I die.

46:1 And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
Beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.

46:2 And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said,
Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

46:3 And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down
into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 I will
go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up
again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried
Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the
wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.

46:6 And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his
seed with him: 46:7 His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his
daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with
him into Egypt.

46:8 And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came
into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.

46:9 And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and
Carmi.

46:10 And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin,
and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.

46:11 And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

46:12 And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and
Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of
Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.

46:13 And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and
Shimron.

46:14 And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.

46:15 These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in
Padanaram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty and three.

46:16 And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri,
and Arodi, and Areli.

46:17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah,
and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.

46:18 These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.

46:19 The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.

46:20 And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and
Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare
unto him.

46:21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel,
Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.

46:22 These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the
souls were fourteen.

46:23 And the sons of Dan; Hushim.

46:24 And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shillem.

46:25 These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.

46:26 All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of
his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore
and six; 46:27 And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt,
were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into
Egypt, were threescore and ten.

46:28 And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face
unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.

46:29 And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel
his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on
his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

46:30 And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen
thy face, because thou art yet alive.

46:31 And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house,
I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my
father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
46:32 And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have.

46:33 And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and
shall say, What is your occupation?  46:34 That ye shall say, Thy
servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now,
both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of
Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

47:1 Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land
of Goshen.

47:2 And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto Pharaoh.

47:3 And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And
they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also
our fathers.

47:4 They said morever unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we
come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the
famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let
thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.

47:5 And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy
brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 The land of Egypt is before thee; in
the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

47:7 And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before
Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

47:8 And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?  47:9 And Jacob
said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of
my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

47:10 And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.

47:11 And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a
possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.

47:12 And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his
father's household, with bread, according to their families.

47:13 And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very
sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by
reason of the famine.

47:14 And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought:
and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.

47:15 And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of
Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread:
for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.

47:16 And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your
cattle, if money fail.

47:17 And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them
bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle
of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all
their cattle for that year.

47:18 When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our
money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not
ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
47:19 Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants
unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that
the land be not desolate.

47:20 And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the
Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over
them: so the land became Pharaoh's.

47:21 And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of
the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.

47:22 Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had
a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.

47:23 Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this
day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall
sow the land.

47:24 And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give
the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for
seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households,
and for food for your little ones.

47:25 And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in
the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.

47:26 And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day,
that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.

47:27 And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen;
and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly.

47:28 And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the
whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

47:29 And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his
son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight,
put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly
with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt: 47:30 But I will lie with
my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their
buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.

47:31 And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.

48:1 And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph,
Behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons,
Manasseh and Ephraim.

48:2 And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto
thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz
in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 And said unto me, Behold,
I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee
a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee
for an everlasting possession.

48:5 And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto
thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are
mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine,
and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their
inheritance.

48:7 And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the
land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come
unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same
is Bethlehem.

48:8 And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?  48:9
And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given
me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I
will bless them.

48:10 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see.

And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced
them.

48:11 And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face:
and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.

48:12 And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
himself with his face to the earth.

48:13 And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward
Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.

48:18 And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is
the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

48:19 And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it:
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall
become a multitude of nations.

48:20 And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel
bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set
Ephraim before Manasseh.

48:21 And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last
days.

49:2 Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and
hearken unto Israel your father.

49:3 Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my
strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power: 49:4
Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to
thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

49:5 Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations.

49:6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly,
mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man,
and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.

49:7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it
was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

49:8 Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall
be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down
before thee.

49:9 Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall
rouse him up?  49:10 The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a
lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall
the gathering of the people be.

49:11 Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the
choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the
blood of grapes: 49:12 His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth
white with milk.

49:13 Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for
an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.

49:14 Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
49:15 And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was
pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto
tribute.

49:16 Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

49:17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

49:18 I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD.

49:19 Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.

49:20 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

49:22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 The archers have sorely
grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 But his bow abode
in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of
Israel:) 49:25 Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and
by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 The blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

49:27 Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour
the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

49:28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that
their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to
his blessing he blessed them.

49:29 And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered
unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the
field of Ephron the Hittite, 49:30 In the cave that is in the field of
Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham
bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried
Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.

49:32 The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of Heth.

49:33 And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.

50:2 And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.

50:3 And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the
days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him
threescore and ten days.

50:4 And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto
the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes,
speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, 50:5 My father made
me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in
the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go
up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.

50:6 And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he
made thee swear.

50:7 And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all
the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders
of the land of Egypt, 50:8 And all the house of Joseph, and his
brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.

50:9 And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was
a very great company.

50:10 And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond
Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation:
and he made a mourning for his father seven days.

50:11 And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning
to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim,
which is beyond Jordan.

50:12 And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them: 50:13
For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in
the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the
field for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before
Mamre.

50:14 And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his
father.

50:15 And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
all the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did
command before he died, saying, 50:17 So shall ye say unto Joseph,
Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin;
for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the
trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

50:18 And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, Behold, we be thy servants.

50:19 And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of
God?  50:20 But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant
it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people
alive.

50:21 Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little
ones.

And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and
Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon
Joseph's knees.

50:24 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

50:25 And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.




The Second Book of Moses:  Called Exodus


1:1 Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came
into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.

1:2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 1:3 Issachar, Zebulun, and
Benjamin, 1:4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

1:5 And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy
souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.

1:6 And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land
was filled with them.

1:8 Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.

1:9 And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of
Israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 Come on, let us deal wisely
with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there
falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight
against us, and so get them up out of the land.

1:11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and
Raamses.

1:12 But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and
grew.

And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.

1:13 And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with
rigour: 1:14 And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in
morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all
their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.

1:15 And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the
name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah: 1:16 And
he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and
see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but
if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

1:17 But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt
commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

1:18 And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto
them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children
alive?  1:19 And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew
women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are
delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.

1:20 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

1:21 And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he
made them houses.

1:22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is
born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save
alive.

2:1 And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a
daughter of Levi.

2:2 And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that
he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.

2:3 And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child
therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

2:4 And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

2:5 And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the
river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she
saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

2:6 And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the
babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the
Hebrews' children.

2:7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to
thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for
thee?  2:8 And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went
and called the child's mother.

2:9 And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and
nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the women took
the child, and nursed it.

2:10 And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter,
and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said,
Because I drew him out of the water.

2:11 And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he
went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied
an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.

2:12 And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there
was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

2:13 And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the
Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong,
Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?  2:14 And he said, Who made thee a
prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou
killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing
is known.

2:15 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But
Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian:
and he sat down by a well.

2:16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and
drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

2:17 And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up
and helped them, and watered their flock.

2:18 And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that
ye are come so soon to day?  2:19 And they said, An Egyptian delivered
us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for
us, and watered the flock.

2:20 And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that
ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses
Zipporah his daughter.

2:22 And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he
said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt
died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.

2:24 And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant
with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

2:25 And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect
unto them.

3:1 Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest
of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

3:2 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said,
Here am I.

3:5 And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon God.

3:7 And the LORD said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; 3:8 And I am come down to
deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites.

3:9 Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come
unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians
oppress them.

3:10 Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou
mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.

3:11 And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh,
and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
3:12 And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a
token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth
the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.

3:13 And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of
Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say
unto them?  3:14 And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said,
Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel, the LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them,
The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in Egypt: 3:17 And I have said, I will bring
you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites,
and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

3:18 And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou
and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say
unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us
go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we
may sacrifice to the LORD our God.

3:19 And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not
by a mighty hand.

3:20 And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my
wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will
let you go.

3:21 And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians:
and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

4:1 And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The LORD hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he
said, A rod.

4:3 And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.

4:4 And the LORD said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 That they may believe that the LORD God of their
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 And the LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into
thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
voice of the latter sign.

4:9 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the
water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which
thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

4:10 And Moses said unto the LORD, O my LORD, I am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 And the LORD said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the
LORD?  4:12 Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 And he said, O my LORD, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4:14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said,
Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well.
And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of God.

4:17 And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said
unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to
Moses, Go in peace.

4:19 And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in
his hand.

4:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into
Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have
put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let
the people go.

4:22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is
my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 And I say unto thee, Let my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the LORD met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.
And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.

4:28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of Israel: 4:30 And Aaron spake all the words which the
LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 And the people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had
visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus
saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to
let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go.

5:3 And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the LORD our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.

5:4 And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and
Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 Ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be
idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.

5:9 Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not
give you straw.

5:11 Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
work shall be diminished.

5:12 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of
Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.

5:13 And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your
daily tasks, as when there was straw.

5:14 And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's
taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore
have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to
day, as heretofore?  5:15 Then the officers of the children of Israel
came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with
thy servants?  5:16 There is no straw given unto thy servants, and
they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us
go and do sacrifice to the LORD.

5:18 Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your
bricks of your daily task.

5:20 And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from Pharaoh: 5:21 And they said unto them, The LORD look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, LORD, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do
to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD: 6:3
And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name
of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

6:4 And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom
the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.

6:6 Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I
will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will
rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 And I will take you to me for a
people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the
LORD your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians.

6:8 And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did
swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give
it you for an heritage: I am the LORD.

6:9 And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened
not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:11 Go in, speak unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of
his land.

6:12 And Moses spake before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of
Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcised lips?  6:13 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto
Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.

6:14 These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben
the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these
be the families of Reuben.

6:15 And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin,
and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the
families of Simeon.

6:16 And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their
generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the
life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their
families.

6:18 And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel:
and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.

6:19 And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families
of Levi according to their generations.

6:20 And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.

6:22 And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.

6:23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of
Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and
Ithamar.

6:24 And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these
are the families of the Korhites.

6:25 And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel
to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers
of the Levites according to their families.

6:26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said, Bring out
the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their
armies.

6:27 These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out
the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.

6:28 And it came to pass on the day when the LORD spake unto Moses in
the land of Egypt, 6:29 That the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, I am
the LORD: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto
thee.

6:30 And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 And the LORD said
unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother
shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of
his land.

7:3 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of Egypt.

7:4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand
upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.

7:5 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch
forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from
among them.

7:6 And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded them, so did they.

7:7 And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three
years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.

7:8 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 7:9 When
Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then
thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh,
and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the
LORD had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and
before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the LORD had said.

7:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath
sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD:
behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
vessels of stone.

7:20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight
of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that
were in the river were turned to blood.

7:21 And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and
the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was
blood throughout all the land of Egypt.

7:22 And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and
Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
LORD had said.

7:23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set
his heart to this also.

7:24 And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten
the river.

8:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him,
Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:2 And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy
borders with frogs: 8:3 And the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
8:4 And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and
upon all thy servants.

8:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.

8:6 And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the
frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

8:7 And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of Egypt.

8:8 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the
LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and
I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.

8:9 And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD
our God.

8:11 And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto
the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.

8:13 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.

8:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.

8:17 And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
Egypt.

8:18 And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God:
and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the LORD had said.

8:20 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people,
and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of
swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth.

8:23 And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 And the LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye,
sacrifice to your God in the land.

8:26 And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as he shall command us.

8:28 And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away:
intreat for me.

8:29 And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat
the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal
deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
LORD.

8:30 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

8:31 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and he removed
the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; there remained not one.

8:32 And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would
he let the people go.

9:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him,
Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they
may serve me.

9:2 For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

9:4 And the LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the
cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the
children's of Israel.

9:5 And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the LORD
shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.

9:7 And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of
the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did
not let the people go.

9:8 And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls
of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven
in the sight of Pharaoh.

9:9 And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall
be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of Egypt.

9:10 And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and
Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the
boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the
Egyptians.

9:12 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not
unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses.

9:13 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the
Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy
people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to
shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all
the earth.

9:17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt
not let them go?  9:18 Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause
it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since
the foundation thereof even until now.

9:19 Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast
in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
them, and they shall die.

9:20 He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh
made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 And he
that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his
cattle in the field.

9:22 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and
upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of
Egypt.

9:23 And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

9:24 So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it
became a nation.

9:25 And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were,
was there no hail.

9:27 And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto
them, I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my
people are wicked.

9:28 Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I
will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the LORD's.

9:30 But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet
fear the LORD God.

9:31 And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in
the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad
his hands unto the LORD: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.

9:35 And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses.

10:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 And that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt,
and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I
am the LORD.

10:3 And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus
saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
I bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 And they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of
the field: 10:6 And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out
from Pharaoh.

10:7 And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their
God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?  10:8 And Moses and
Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go,
serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 And
Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.

10:10 And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will
let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that ye
did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.

10:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the
land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of
Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath
left.

10:13 And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and
the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 And the locust went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of Egypt.

10:16 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I
have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.

10:17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

10:19 And the LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of Egypt.

10:20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let
the children of Israel go.

10:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even
darkness which may be felt.

10:22 And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was
a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: 10:23 They saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but
all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the LORD;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones
also go with you.

10:25 And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.

10:26 Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and
we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither.

10:27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again
no more.

11:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more
upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence:
when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence
altogether.

11:2 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of
his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and
jewels of gold.

11:3 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians.

Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the
sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight will I go out
into the midst of Egypt: 11:5 And all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt shall die, from the first born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the
mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

11:7 But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move
his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the LORD
doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.

11:8 And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that
follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from
Pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.

11:10 And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and
the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of Israel go out of his land.

12:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt
saying, 12:2 This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it
shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 And
if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour
next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls;
every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.

12:5 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 And ye shall
keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole
assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.

12:7 And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side
posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat
it.

12:8 And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and
unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.

12:9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with
fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.

12:10 And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and
that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on
your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
it is the LORD's passover.

12:12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will
smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and
against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.

12:13 And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where
ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.

12:14 And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep
it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordinance for ever.

12:15 Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye
shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth
leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul
shall be cut off from Israel.

12:16 And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in
the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner
of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat,
that only may be done of you.

12:17 And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this
selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt:
therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an
ordinance for ever.

12:18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
month at even.

12:19 Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
in the land.

12:20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye
eat unleavened bread.

12:21 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto
them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and
kill the passover.

12:22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts
with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at
the door of his house until the morning.

12:23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when
he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the
LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to
come in unto your houses to smite you.

12:24 And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to
thy sons for ever.

12:25 And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the
LORD will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
this service.

12:26 And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, What mean ye by this service?  12:27 That ye shall say, It is the
sacrifice of the LORD's passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and
delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had
commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

12:29 And it came to pass, that at midnight the LORD smote all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat
on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was
not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up,
and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of
Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.

12:32 Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be
gone; and bless me also.

12:33 And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.

12:34 And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their
kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

12:35 And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses;
and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment: 12:36 And the LORD gave the people favour in the
sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as
they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.

12:37 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

12:38 And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and
herds, even very much cattle.

12:39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought
forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust
out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for
themselves any victual.

12:40 Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in
Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of
the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.

12:42 It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing
them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be
observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.

12:43 And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of
the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 But every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.

12:48 And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses
and Aaron, so did they.

12:51 And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the LORD did bring
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 13:2 Sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye
came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of
hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened
bread be eaten.

13:4 This day came ye out in the month Abib.

13:5 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of
the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites,
and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a
land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in
this month.

13:6 Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh
day shall be a feast to the LORD.

13:7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no
leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen
with thee in all thy quarters.

13:8 And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done
because of that which the LORD did unto me when I came forth out of
Egypt.

13:9 And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
memorial between thine eyes, that the LORD's law may be in thy mouth:
for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.

13:10 Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year
to year.

13:11 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of
the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall
give it thee, 13:12 That thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all that
openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which
thou hast; the males shall be the LORD's.

13:13 And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and
if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all
the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.

13:14 And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come,
saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of
hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:
13:15 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that
the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the
firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to
the LORD all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the
firstborn of my children I redeem.

13:16 And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth
out of Egypt.

13:17 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that
God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines,
although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt: 13:18 But God led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea:
and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.

13:19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and
ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

13:20 And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham,
in the edge of the wilderness.

13:21 And the LORD went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night: 13:22 He took not away the pillar of
the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the
people.

14:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 14:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth,
between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall
ye encamp by the sea.

14:3 For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are
entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

14:4 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after
them; and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that
the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did so.

14:5 And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the
heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people,
and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from
serving us?  14:6 And he made ready his chariot, and took his people
with him: 14:7 And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the
chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.

14:8 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he
pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went
out with an high hand.

14:9 But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots
of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them
encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.

14:10 And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up
their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they
were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.

14:11 And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt,
hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou
dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?  14:12 Is not this
the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we
may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the
Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

14:13 And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and
see the salvation of the LORD, which he will shew to you to day: for
the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever.

14:14 The LORD shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

14:15 And the LORD said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me?
speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward: 14:16 But
lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and
divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through
the midst of the sea.

14:17 And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and
they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and
upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:18 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have
gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his
horsemen.

14:19 And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel,
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 And it came between
the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud
and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
one came not near the other all the night.

14:21 And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and
made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

14:22 And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon
the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right
hand, and on their left.

14:23 And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst
of the sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.

14:24 And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the LORD looked
unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, 14:25 And took off
their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the
Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the LORD
fighteth for them against the Egyptians.

14:26 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the
sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their
chariots, and upon their horsemen.

14:27 And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians
fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of
the sea.

14:28 And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the
horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after
them; there remained not so much as one of them.

14:29 But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of
the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and
on their left.

14:30 Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 And Israel saw that great work which the LORD did upon the
Egyptians: and the people feared the LORD, and believed the LORD, and
his servant Moses.

15:1 Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the
LORD, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the LORD, for he hath
triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:2 The LORD is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation:
he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father's God,
and I will exalt him.

15:3 The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his name.

15:4 Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his
chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.

15:5 The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a
stone.

15:6 Thy right hand, O LORD, is become glorious in power: thy right
hand, O LORD, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.

15:7 And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown
them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which
consumed them as stubble.

15:8 And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered
together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were
congealed in the heart of the sea.

15:9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my
hand shall destroy them.

15:10 Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank
as lead in the mighty waters.

15:11 Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?  15:12 Thou
stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

15:13 Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast
redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy
habitation.

15:14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on
the inhabitants of Palestina.

15:15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab,
trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan
shall melt away.

15:16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine
arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O
LORD, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.

15:17 Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of
thine inheritance, in the place, O LORD, which thou hast made for thee
to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O LORD, which thy hands have
established.

15:18 The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his
horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought again the waters of the
sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the
midst of the sea.

15:20 And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel
in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and
with dances.

15:21 And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the LORD, for he hath
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:22 So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into
the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness,
and found no water.

15:23 And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters
of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
Marah.

15:24 And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we
drink?  15:25 And he cried unto the LORD; and the LORD shewed him a
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made
sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he
proved them, 15:26 And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the
voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his
sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his
statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have
brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that healeth thee.

15:27 And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation
of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is
between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their departing out of the land of Egypt.

16:2 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 And the children of
Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the
LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or
no.

16:5 And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as
they gather daily.

16:6 And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At
even, then ye shall know that the LORD hath brought you out from the
land of Egypt: 16:7 And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of
the LORD; for that he heareth your murmurings against the LORD: and
what are we, that ye murmur against us?  16:8 And Moses said, This
shall be, when the LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full; for that the LORD heareth your
murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your
murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD.

16:9 And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the
children of Israel, Come near before the LORD: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.

16:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:12 I have heard the
murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread;
and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God.

16:13 And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and
covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of
the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar
frost on the ground.

16:15 And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to
another, It is manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said
unto them, This is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat.

16:16 This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, Gather of it
every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to
the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in
his tents.

16:17 And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some
less.

16:18 And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much
had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they
gathered every man according to his eating.

16:19 And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.

16:20 Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them
left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses
was wroth with them.

16:21 And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his
eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.

16:22 And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice
as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the
congregation came and told Moses.

16:23 And he said unto them, This is that which the LORD hath said, To
morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the LORD: bake that which
ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which
remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

16:24 And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did
not stink, neither was there any worm therein.

16:25 And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto
the LORD: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

16:26 Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is
the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

16:27 And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on
the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

16:28 And the LORD said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my
commandments and my laws?  16:29 See, for that the LORD hath given you
the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place
on the seventh day.

16:30 So the people rested on the seventh day.

16:31 And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it
was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers
made with honey.

16:32 And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commandeth,
Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see
the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought
you forth from the land of Egypt.

16:33 And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of
manna therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your
generations.

16:34 As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the
Testimony, to be kept.

16:35 And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they
came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
borders of the land of Canaan.

16:36 Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from
the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the
commandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no
water for the people to drink.

17:2 Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us
water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with
me? wherefore do ye tempt the LORD?  17:3 And the people thirsted
there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said,
Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill
us and our children and our cattle with thirst?  17:4 And Moses cried
unto the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be
almost ready to stone me.

17:5 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take
with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest
the river, take in thine hand, and go.

17:6 Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders
of Israel.

17:7 And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the
LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not?  17:8 Then came Amalek,
and fought with Israel in Rephidim.

17:9 And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight
with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of God in mine hand.

17:10 So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek:
and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.

17:12 But Moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of
the sword.

17:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a
book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put
out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.

17:15 And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it
Jehovahnissi: 17:16 For he said, Because the LORD hath sworn that the
LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father in law, heard of
all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that
the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt; 18:2 Then Jethro, Moses'
father in law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
18:3 And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for
he said, I have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 And the name of
the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine
help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh: 18:5 And Jethro,
Moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into
the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God: 18:6 And he
said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy
wife, and her two sons with her.

18:7 And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance,
and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they
came into the tent.

18:8 And Moses told his father in law all that the LORD had done unto
Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the travail
that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD delivered them.

18:9 And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done
to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.

18:10 And Jethro said, Blessed be the LORD, who hath delivered you out
of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath
delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.

18:11 Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods: for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 And Jethro, Moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to
eat bread with Moses' father in law before God.

18:13 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the
people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the
evening.

18:14 And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?  18:15 And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people
come unto me to enquire of God: 18:16 When they have a matter, they
come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them
know the statutes of God, and his laws.

18:17 And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou
doest is not good.

18:18 Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is
with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to
perform it thyself alone.

18:19 Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God
shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto God: 18:20 And thou shalt teach them
ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must
walk, and the work that they must do.

18:21 Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over
them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 And let them judge the people at
all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring
unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be
easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou
shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their
place in peace.

18:24 So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did
all that he had said.

18:25 And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads
over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens.

18:26 And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they
brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

18:27 And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into
his own land.

19:1 In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth
out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of Sinai.

19:2 For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert
of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped
before the mount.

19:3 And Moses went up unto God, and the LORD called unto him out of
the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and
tell the children of Israel; 19:4 Ye have seen what I did unto the
Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 And ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.

These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of
Israel.

19:7 And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid
before their faces all these words which the LORD commanded him.

19:8 And all the people answered together, and said, All that the LORD
hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people
unto the LORD.

19:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick
cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever.

And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD.

19:10 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify
them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 And
be ready against the third day: for the third day the LORD will come
down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.

19:12 And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying,
Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch
the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to
death: 19:13 There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be
stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not
live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

19:14 And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and
sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

19:15 And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day:
come not at your wives.

19:16 And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and
the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that
was in the camp trembled.

19:17 And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with
God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD
descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

19:19 And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder
and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

19:20 And the LORD came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the
mount: and the LORD called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses
went up.

19:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest
they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.

19:22 And let the priests also, which come near to the LORD, sanctify
themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them.

19:23 And Moses said unto the LORD, The people cannot come up to mount
Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and
sanctify it.

19:24 And the LORD said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt
come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the LORD, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 And God spake all these words, saying, 20:2 I am the LORD thy
God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

20:3 Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I
the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me; 20:6 And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love
me, and keep my commandments.

20:7 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the
LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

20:8 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

20:9 Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: 20:10 But the
seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor
thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates: 20:11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the
LORD blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

20:12 Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

20:13 Thou shalt not kill.

20:14 Thou shalt not commit adultery.

20:15 Thou shalt not steal.

20:16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

20:17 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

20:18 And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the
people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not God speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin
not.

20:21 And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the
thick darkness where God was.

20:22 And the LORD said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the
children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from
heaven.

20:23 Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make
unto you gods of gold.

20:24 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice
thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and
thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto
thee, and I will bless thee.

20:25 And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build
it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast
polluted it.

20:26 Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy
nakedness be not discovered thereon.

21:1 Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.

21:2 If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in
the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

21:3 If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were
married, then his wife shall go out with him.

21:4 If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons
or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he
shall go out by himself.

21:5 And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife,
and my children; I will not go out free: 21:6 Then his master shall
bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or
unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an
aul; and he shall serve him for ever.

21:7 And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not
go out as the menservants do.

21:8 If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself,
then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation
he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

21:9 And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters.

21:10 If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish.

21:11 And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out
free without money.

21:12 He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death.

21:13 And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand;
then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

21:14 But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him
with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

21:15 And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely
put to death.

21:16 And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found
in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

21:17 And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be
put to death.

21:18 And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone,
or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed: 21:19 If he
rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote
him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall
cause him to be thoroughly healed.

21:20 And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he
die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.

21:21 Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be
punished: for he is his money.

21:22 If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit
depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely
punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he
shall pay as the judges determine.

21:23 And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
21:24 Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
21:25 Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

21:26 And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his
maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.

21:27 And if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's
tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.

21:28 If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall
be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of
the ox shall be quit.

21:29 But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and
it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but
that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his
owner also shall be put to death.

21:30 If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for
the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.

21:31 Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according
to this judgment shall it be done unto him.

21:32 If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall
give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be
stoned.

21:33 And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and
not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein; 21:34 The owner of the
pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the
dead beast shall be his.

21:35 And if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall
sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also
they shall divide.

21:36 Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past,
and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and
the dead shall be his own.

22:1 If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it;
he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

22:2 If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die,
there shall no blood be shed for him.

22:3 If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him;
for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall
be sold for his theft.

22:4 If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be
ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.

22:5 If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall
put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best
of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make
restitution.

22:6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of
corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he
that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.

22:7 If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep,
and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let
him pay double.

22:8 If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his
neighbour's goods.

22:9 For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for
sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another
challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the
judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto
his neighbour.

22:10 If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a
sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away,
no man seeing it: 22:11 Then shall an oath of the LORD be between them
both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and
the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.

22:12 And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
owner thereof.

22:13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and
he shall not make good that which was torn.

22:14 And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or
die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it
good.

22:15 But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good:
if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.

22:16 And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.

22:17 If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay
money according to the dowry of virgins.

22:18 Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

22:19 Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.

22:20 He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the LORD only, he
shall be utterly destroyed.

22:21 Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt.

22:22 Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

22:23 If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I
will surely hear their cry; 22:24 And my wrath shall wax hot, and I
will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

22:25 If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee,
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him
usury.

22:26 If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou
shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 For that
is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will
hear; for I am gracious.

22:28 Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy
people.

22:29 Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and
of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.

22:30 Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep:
seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give
it me.

22:31 And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh
that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

23:1 Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

23:2 Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou
speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment: 23:3 Neither
shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.

23:4 If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt
surely bring it back to him again.

23:5 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his
burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with
him.

23:6 Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.

23:7 Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous
slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked.

23:8 And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and
perverteth the words of the righteous.

23:9 Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of
a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

23:10 And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the
fruits thereof: 23:11 But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and
lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave
the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with
thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.

23:12 Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou
shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy
handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

23:13 And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and
make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out
of thy mouth.

23:14 Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

23:15 Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat
unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time
appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and
none shall appear before me empty:) 23:16 And the feast of harvest,
the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and
the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou
hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.

23:17 Three items in the year all thy males shall appear before the
LORD God.

23:18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened
bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.

23:19 The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into
the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

23:20 Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way,
and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.

23:21 Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will
not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

23:22 But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I
speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary
unto thine adversaries.

23:23 For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the
Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites,
the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.

23:24 Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do
after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite
break down their images.

23:25 And ye shall serve the LORD your God, and he shall bless thy
bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of
thee.

23:26 There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy
land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.

23:27 I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people
to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their
backs unto thee.

23:28 And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the
Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.

23:29 I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the
land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against
thee.

23:30 By little and little I will drive them out from before thee,
until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

23:31 And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of
the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will
deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
drive them out before thee.

23:32 Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the LORD, thou, and Aaron,
Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 And Moses alone shall come near the LORD: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 And Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and
said, All the words which the LORD hath said will we do.

24:4 And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in
the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars,
according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

24:5 And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered
burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the LORD.

24:6 And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half
of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of
the people: and they said, All that the LORD hath said will we do, and
be obedient.

24:8 And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9 Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of
the elders of Israel: 24:10 And they saw the God of Israel: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.

24:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up
into the mount of God.

24:14 And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 And the glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 And the sight of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.

24:18 And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into
the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.

25:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that
giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.

25:3 And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and
silver, and brass, 25:4 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 25:5 And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 Oil for the light, spices for anointing
oil, and for sweet incense, 25:7 Onyx stones, and stones to be set in
the ephod, and in the breastplate.

25:8 And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.

25:9 According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the
tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so
shall ye make it.

25:10 And they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

25:11 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without
shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round
about.

25:12 And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in
the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of
it, and two rings in the other side of it.

25:13 And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

25:14 And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the
ark, that the ark may be borne with them.

25:15 The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be
taken from it.

25:16 And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give
thee.

25:17 And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof.

25:18 And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt
thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.

25:19 And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the
other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the
two ends thereof.

25:20 And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high,
covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look
one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims
be.

25:21 And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the
ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.

25:22 And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee
from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are
upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in
commandment unto the children of Israel.

25:23 Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall
be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit
and a half the height thereof.

25:24 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a
crown of gold round about.

25:25 And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round
about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round
about.

25:26 And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings
in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.

25:27 Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the
staves to bear the table.

25:28 And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold, that the table may be borne with them.

25:29 And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and
covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt
thou make them.

25:30 And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.

25:31 And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work
shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls,
his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.

25:32 And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three
branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of
the candlestick out of the other side: 25:33 Three bowls made like
unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls
made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in
the six branches that come out of the candlestick.

25:34 And in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto
almonds, with their knops and their flowers.

25:35 And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a
knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of
the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the
candlestick.

25:36 Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it
shall be one beaten work of pure gold.

25:37 And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall
light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.

25:38 And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of
pure gold.

25:39 Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these
vessels.

25:40 And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was
shewed thee in the mount.

26:1 Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of
cunning work shalt thou make them.

26:2 The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and
the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains
shall have one measure.

26:3 The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and
other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.

26:4 And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one
curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou
make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the
second.

26:5 Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops
shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of
the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.

26:6 And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains
together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.

26:7 And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon
the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.

26:8 The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth
of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of
one measure.

26:9 And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six
curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the
forefront of the tabernacle.

26:10 And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain
that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the
curtain which coupleth the second.

26:11 And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches
into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.

26:12 And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the
half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the
tabernacle.

26:13 And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of
that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it
shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that
side, to cover it.

26:14 And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed
red, and a covering above of badgers' skins.

26:15 And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood
standing up.

26:16 Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a
half shall be the breadth of one board.

26:17 Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against
another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

26:18 And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards
on the south side southward.

26:19 And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty
boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two
sockets under another board for his two tenons.

26:20 And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side
there shall be twenty boards: 26:21 And their forty sockets of silver;
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

26:22 And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six
boards.

26:23 And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle
in the two sides.

26:24 And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be
coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be
for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

26:25 And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver,
sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under
another board.

26:26 And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of
the one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 And five bars for the boards of
the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.

26:28 And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from
end to end.

26:29 And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their
rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars
with gold.

26:30 And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion
thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.

26:31 And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
26:32 And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood
overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four
sockets of silver.

26:33 And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou
mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and
the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most
holy.

26:34 And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony
in the most holy place.

26:35 And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the
candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle
toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.

26:36 And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with
needlework.

26:37 And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold:
and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.

27:1 And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long,
and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height
thereof shall be three cubits.

27:2 And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners
thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it
with brass.

27:3 And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his
shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the
vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.

27:4 And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon
the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.

27:5 And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath,
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.

27:6 And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood,
and overlay them with brass.

27:7 And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall
be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.

27:8 Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in
the mount, so shall they make it.

27:9 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south
side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined
linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 27:10 And the twenty
pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks
of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.

27:11 And likewise for the north side in length there shall be
hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their
twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of
silver.

27:12 And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be
hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.

27:13 And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be
fifty cubits.

27:14 The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits:
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:15 And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their
pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:16 And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty
cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen,
wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their
sockets four.

27:17 All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with
silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.

27:18 The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the
breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined
linen, and their sockets of brass.

27:19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof,
and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of
brass.

27:20 And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring
thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn
always.

27:21 In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is
before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening
to morning before the LORD: it shall be a statute for ever unto their
generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.

28:1 And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him,
from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the
priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar,
Aaron's sons.

28:2 And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory
and for beauty.

28:3 And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have
filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments
to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's
office.

28:4 And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate,
and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle:
and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons,
that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:5 And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen.

28:6 And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.

28:7 It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two
edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.

28:8 And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be
of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

28:9 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names
of the children of Israel: 28:10 Six of their names on one stone, and
the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their
birth.

28:11 With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a
signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the
children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.

28:12 And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron
shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a
memorial.

28:13 And thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 And two chains of pure
gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten
the wreathen chains to the ouches.

28:15 And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning
work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt
thou make it.

28:16 Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length
thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.

28:17 And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of
stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
this shall be the first row.

28:18 And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a
diamond.

28:19 And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

28:20 And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they
shall be set in gold in their inclosings.

28:21 And the stones shall be with the names of the children of
Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve
tribes.

28:22 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
wreathen work of pure gold.

28:23 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and
shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.

28:24 And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.

28:25 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt
fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the
ephod before it.

28:26 And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them
upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is
in the side of the ephod inward.

28:27 And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them
on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of
the ephod.

28:28 And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto
the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the
curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed
from the ephod.

28:29 And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the
breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
place, for a memorial before the LORD continually.

28:30 And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in
before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of
Israel upon his heart before the LORD continually.

28:31 And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.

28:32 And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst
thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of
it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

28:33 And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and
bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 A golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe
round about.

28:35 And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when
he cometh out, that he die not.

28:36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

28:37 And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.

28:38 And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow
in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead,
that they may be accepted before the LORD.

28:39 And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt
make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of
needlework.

28:40 And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make
for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and
for beauty.

28:41 And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons
with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify
them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:42 And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their
nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43
And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto
the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity,
and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after
him.

29:1 And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: Take one young
bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 And unleavened bread, and
cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed
with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

29:3 And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

29:4 And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

29:5 And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat,
and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and
gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 And thou shalt put
the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

29:7 Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his
head, and anoint him.

29:8 And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.

29:9 And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and
put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a
perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.

29:10 And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the
tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their
hands upon the head of the bullock.

29:11 And thou shalt kill the bullock before the LORD, by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

29:12 And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon
the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside
the bottom of the altar.

29:13 And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and
the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

29:14 But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt
thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

29:15 Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put
their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:16 And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and
sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

29:17 And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of
him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.

29:18 And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt
offering unto the LORD: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire
unto the LORD.

29:19 And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall
put their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:20 Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it
upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right
ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the
great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar
round about.

29:21 And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of
the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he
shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

29:22 Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the
two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder;
for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 And one loaf of bread, and one
cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened
bread that is before the LORD: 29:24 And thou shalt put all in the
hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for
a wave offering before the LORD.

29:25 And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon
the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD: it
is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

29:26 And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's
consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the LORD: and it
shall be thy part.

29:27 And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the
shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved
up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron,
and of that which is for his sons: 29:28 And it shall be Aaron's and
his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it is
an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children
of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave
offering unto the LORD.

29:29 And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons' after him, to
be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.

29:30 And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven
days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to
minister in the holy place.

29:31 And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his
flesh in the holy place.

29:32 And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the
bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

29:33 And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was
made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat
thereof, because they are holy.

29:34 And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread,
remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire:
it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

29:35 And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to
all things which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou
consecrate them.

29:36 And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for
atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an
atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.

29:37 Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and
sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth
the altar shall be holy.

29:38 Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two
lambs of the first year day by day continually.

29:39 The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb
thou shalt offer at even: 29:40 And with the one lamb a tenth deal of
flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the
fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.

29:41 And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do
thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according
to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by
fire unto the LORD.

29:42 This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the LORD: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44 And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me
in the priest's office.

29:45 And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their
God.

29:46 And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought
them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am
the LORD their God.

30:1 And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim
wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height
thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.

30:3 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and
the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt
make unto it a crown of gold round about.

30:4 And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it,
by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make
it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.

30:5 And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

30:6 And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the
testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I
will meet with thee.

30:7 And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he
dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.

30:8 And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense
upon it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your
generations.

30:9 Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice,
nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

30:10 And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the
year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it
is most holy unto the LORD.

30:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:12 When thou takest
the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they
give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou
numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou
numberest them.

30:13 This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are
numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel
is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the LORD.

30:14 Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty
years old and above, shall give an offering unto the LORD.

30:15 The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the LORD, to make
an atonement for your souls.

30:16 And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of
Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel
before the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:18 Thou shalt also
make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and
thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat: 30:20 When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near
to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the LORD:
30:21 So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die
not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to
his seed throughout their generations.

30:22 Moreover the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:23 Take thou also
unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of
sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and
of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 30:24 And of cassia
five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil
olive an hin: 30:25 And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an
ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy
anointing oil.

30:26 And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation
therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 And the table and all
his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of
incense, 30:28 And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels,
and the laver and his foot.

30:29 And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy:
whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.

30:30 And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them,
that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

30:31 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This
shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make
any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it
shall be holy unto you.

30:33 Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of
it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.

30:34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure
frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 And thou
shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary,
tempered together, pure and holy: 30:36 And thou shalt beat some of it
very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of
the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you
most holy.

30:37 And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make
to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto
thee holy for the LORD.

30:38 Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
even be cut off from his people.

31:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:2 See, I have called by
name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:
31:3 And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31:4 To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, 31:5 And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of
timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise
hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have
commanded thee; 31:7 The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark
of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the
furniture of the tabernacle, 31:8 And the table and his furniture, and
the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
31:9 And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the
laver and his foot, 31:10 And the cloths of service, and the holy
garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office, 31:11 And the anointing oil, and
sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have
commanded thee shall they do.

31:12 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:13 Speak thou also
unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep:
for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that
ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you.

31:14 Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you:
every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever
doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his
people.

31:15 Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of
rest, holy to the LORD: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day,
he shall surely be put to death.

31:16 Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to
observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for
in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of God.

32:1 And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of
the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and
said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for
this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we
wot not what is become of him.

32:2 And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which
are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.

32:3 And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in
their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

32:4 And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a
graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These
be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

32:5 And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron
made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the LORD.

32:6 And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt
offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted
themselves: 32:8 They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I
commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O
Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

32:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and,
behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 Now therefore let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them:
and I will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, LORD, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
32:12 Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.

32:13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of
will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the
writing of God, graven upon the tables.

32:17 And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do I hear.

32:19 And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made
the children of Israel drink of it.

32:21 And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 And Aaron said, Let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are set on mischief.

32:23 For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us:
for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came
out this calf.

32:25 And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 Then
Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the LORD's
side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered
themselves together unto him.

32:27 And he said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

32:29 For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the LORD,
even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow
upon you a blessing this day.

32:30 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the
people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the
LORD; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.

32:31 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

32:32 Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me,
I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 And the LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me,
him will I blot out of my book.

32:34 Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 And the LORD plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which Aaron made.

33:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto
the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying,
Unto thy seed will I give it: 33:2 And I will send an angel before
thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the
Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: 33:3 Unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the
way.

33:4 And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 For the LORD had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of
Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of
thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy
ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

33:6 And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments
by the mount Horeb.

33:7 And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp,
afar off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the
congregation. And it came to pass, that every one which sought the
LORD went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was
without the camp.

33:8 And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle,
that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and
looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the
cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and
the Lord talked with Moses.

33:10 And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle
door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent
door.

33:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh
unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant
Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the
tabernacle.

33:12 And Moses said unto the LORD, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up
this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with
me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found
grace in my sight.

33:13 Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight,
shew me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in
thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.

33:14 And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give
thee rest.

33:15 And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us
not up hence.

33:16 For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have
found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so
shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are
upon the face of the earth.

33:17 And the LORD said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that
thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know
thee by name.

33:18 And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.

33:19 And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I
will proclaim the name of the LORD before thee; and will be gracious
to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew
mercy.

33:20 And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man
see me, and live.

33:21 And the LORD said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 And it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and
will cover thee with my hand while I pass by: 33:23 And I will take
away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall
not be seen.

34:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like
unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were
in the first tables, which thou brakest.

34:2 And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto
mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

34:3 And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen
throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before
that mount.

34:4 And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses
rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the
LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

34:5 And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the name of the LORD.

34:6 And the LORD passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, The
LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, 34:7 Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear
the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.

34:8 And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and
worshipped.

34:9 And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O LORD, let
my LORD, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and
pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

34:10 And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I
will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in
any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work
of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.

34:11 Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive
out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and
the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.

34:12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in
the midst of thee: 34:13 But ye shall destroy their altars, break
their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 For thou shalt worship
no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:
34:15 Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and
they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods,
and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 34:16 And thou take
of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring
after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

34:17 Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

34:18 The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou
shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the
month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.

34:19 All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among
thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

34:20 But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and
if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the
firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before
me empty.

34:21 Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

34:22 And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of
wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.

34:23 Thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the
LORD God, the God of Israel.

34:24 For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy
borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up
to appear before the LORD thy God thrice in the year.

34:25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven;
neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto
the morning.

34:26 The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto
the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

34:27 And the LORD said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after
the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with
Israel.

34:28 And he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he
did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables
the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with
the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the
mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he
talked with him.

34:30 And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold,
the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the
congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.

34:32 And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave
them in commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him in mount
Sinai.

34:33 And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
face.

34:34 But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he
took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto
the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

34:35 And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin
of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again,
until he went in to speak with him.

35:1 And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel
together, and said unto them, These are the words which the LORD hath
commanded, that ye should do them.

35:2 Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall
be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the LORD: whosoever doeth
work therein shall be put to death.

35:3 Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the
sabbath day.

35:4 And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of
Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD commanded, saying,
35:5 Take ye from among you an offering unto the LORD: whosoever is of
a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the LORD; gold, and
silver, and brass, 35:6 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 35:7 And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 And oil for the light, and spices for
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, 35:9 And onyx stones, and
stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.

35:10 And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that
the LORD hath commanded; 35:11 The tabernacle, his tent, and his
covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his
sockets, 35:12 The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat,
and the vail of the covering, 35:13 The table, and his staves, and all
his vessels, and the shewbread, 35:14 The candlestick also for the
light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light,
35:15 And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil,
and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in
of the tabernacle, 35:16 The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen
grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17
The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the
hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 The pins of the tabernacle,
and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 The cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron
the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
office.

35:20 And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from
the presence of Moses.

35:21 And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every
one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the LORD's offering
to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his
service, and for the holy garments.

35:22 And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing
hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets,
all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of
gold unto the LORD.

35:23 And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and
badgers' skins, brought them.

35:24 Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought
the LORD's offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood
for any work of the service, brought it.

35:25 And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their
hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of
purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.

35:26 And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun
goats' hair.

35:27 And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for
the ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 And spice, and oil for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the LORD,
every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
manner of work, which the LORD had commanded to be made by the hand of
Moses.

35:30 And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the LORD hath
called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe
of Judah; 35:31 And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship; 35:32 And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, 35:33 And in the cutting of stones, to set
them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

35:34 And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and
Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.

35:35 Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of
work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the
embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen,
and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that
devise cunning work.

36:1 Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in
whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all
manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that
the LORD had commanded.

36:2 And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted
man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose
heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 And they
received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had
brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it
withal. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.

36:4 And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
came every man from his work which they made; 36:5 And they spake unto
Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work, which the LORD commanded to make.

36:6 And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed
throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more
work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained
from bringing.

36:7 For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make
it, and too much.

36:8 And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of
the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and
purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.

36:9 The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the
breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.

36:10 And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other
five curtains he coupled one unto another.

36:11 And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the
selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of
another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

36:12 Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in
the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the
loops held one curtain to another.

36:13 And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one
unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.

36:14 And he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the
tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

36:15 The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was
the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.

36:16 And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by
themselves.

36:17 And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain
in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain
which coupleth the second.

36:18 And he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together,
that it might be one.

36:19 And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and
a covering of badgers' skins above that.

36:20 And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing
up.

36:21 The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board
one cubit and a half.

36:22 One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus
did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

36:23 And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the
south side southward: 36:24 And forty sockets of silver he made under
the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and
two sockets under another board for his two tenons.

36:25 And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the
north corner, he made twenty boards, 36:26 And their forty sockets of
silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another
board.

36:27 And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.

36:28 And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the
two sides.

36:29 And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head
thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.

36:30 And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen
sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.

36:31 And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one
side of the tabernacle, 36:32 And five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle for the sides westward.

36:33 And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the
one end to the other.

36:34 And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of
gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.

36:35 And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.

36:36 And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid
them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four
sockets of silver.

36:37 And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework; 36:38 And
the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their
chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of
brass.

37:1 And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half
was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a
cubit and a half the height of it: 37:2 And he overlaid it with pure
gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

37:3 And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four
corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings
upon the other side of it.

37:4 And he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

37:5 And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to
bear the ark.

37:6 And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half
was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

37:7 And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made
he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat; 37:8 One cherub on the end
on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of
the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

37:9 And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered
with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another;
even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.

37:10 And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length
thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the
height thereof: 37:11 And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made
thereunto a crown of gold round about.

37:12 Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about;
and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.

37:13 And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon
the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.

37:14 Over against the border were the rings, the places for the
staves to bear the table.

37:15 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold, to bear the table.

37:16 And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes,
and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure
gold.

37:17 And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he
the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and
his flowers, were of the same: 37:18 And six branches going out of the
sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side
thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof: 37:19 Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one
branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in
another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches
going out of the candlestick.

37:20 And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his
knops, and his flowers: 37:21 And a knop under two branches of the
same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two
branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.

37:22 Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was
one beaten work of pure gold.

37:23 And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his
snuffdishes, of pure gold.

37:24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels
thereof.

37:25 And he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it
was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two
cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.

37:26 And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the
sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a
crown of gold round about.

37:27 And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by
the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for
the staves to bear it withal.

37:28 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold.

37:29 And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of
sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.

38:1 And he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five
cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it
was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.

38:2 And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the
horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

38:3 And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the
shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the
vessels thereof made he of brass.

38:4 And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the
compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.

38:5 And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass,
to be places for the staves.

38:6 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
brass.

38:7 And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar,
to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.

38:8 And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of
the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

38:9 And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings
of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits: 38:10 Their
pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets were of silver.

38:11 And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits,
their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the
hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

38:12 And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their
pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their
fillets of silver.

38:13 And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.

38:14 The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits;
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

38:15 And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that
hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their
sockets three.

38:16 All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined
linen.

38:17 And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their
chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted
with silver.

38:18 And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty
cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits,
answerable to the hangings of the court.

38:19 And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four;
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their
fillets of silver.

38:20 And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round
about, were of brass.

38:21 This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of
testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses,
for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron
the priest.

38:22 And Bezaleel the son Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
made all that the LORD commanded Moses.

38:23 And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan,
an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in
purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of
the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine
talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary.

38:25 And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation
was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore
and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 38:26 A bekah
for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years
old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty men.

38:27 And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of
the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the
hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

38:28 And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he
made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted
them.

38:29 And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two
thousand and four hundred shekels.

38:30 And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for
it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 And the sockets of the
court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins
of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

39:1 And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments
for Aaron; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:2 And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen.

39:3 And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cunning work.

39:4 They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the
two edges was it coupled together.

39:5 And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the
same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:6 And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven,
as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.

39:7 And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should
be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

39:8 And he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the
ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

39:9 It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was
the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.

39:10 And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a
sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.

39:11 And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

39:12 And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

39:13 And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were
inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.

39:14 And the stones were according to the names of the children of
Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.

39:15 And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of
wreathen work of pure gold.

39:16 And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put
the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.

39:17 And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on
the ends of the breastplate.

39:18 And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the
two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before
it.

39:19 And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of
the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the
ephod inward.

39:20 And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two
sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against
the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

39:21 And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of
the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious
girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from
the ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:22 And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

39:23 And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of
an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not
rend.

39:24 And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

39:25 And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the
pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
pomegranates; 39:26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the
LORD commanded Moses.

39:27 And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and
for his sons, 39:28 And a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of
fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 And a
girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of
needlework; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:30 And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and
wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS
TO THE LORD.

39:31 And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon
the mitre; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:32 Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all
that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.

39:33 And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all
his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and
his sockets, 39:34 And the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the
covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 The
ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
39:36 The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37
The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to
be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
39:38 And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet
incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door, 39:39 The brasen
altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the
laver and his foot, 39:40 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and
his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his
pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the
tent of the congregation, 39:41 The cloths of service to do service in
the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

39:42 According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so the children
of Israel made all the work.

39:43 And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done
it as the LORD had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses
blessed them.

40:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 40:2 On the first day of
the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

40:3 And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover
the ark with the vail.

40:4 And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things
that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

40:5 And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the
ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the
tabernacle.

40:6 And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the
door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

40:7 And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation
and the altar, and shalt put water therein.

40:8 And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the
hanging at the court gate.

40:9 And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle,
and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels
thereof: and it shall be holy.

40:10 And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all
his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most
holy.

40:11 And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.

40:12 And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him,
and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

40:14 And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15
And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing
shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their
generations.

40:16 Thus did Moses: according to all that the LORD commanded him, so
did he.

40:17 And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on
the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.

40:18 And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets,
and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared
up his pillars.

40:19 And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the
covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:20 And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the
staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 40:21
And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the
covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the LORD commanded
Moses.

40:22 And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the
side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.

40:23 And he set the bread in order upon it before the LORD; as the
LORD had commanded Moses.

40:24 And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over
against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.

40:25 And he lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD commanded
Moses.

40:26 And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation
before the vail: 40:27 And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

40:28 And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the
burnt offering and the meat offering; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:30 And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their
feet thereat: 40:32 When they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

40:33 And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the
work.

40:34 Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory
of the LORD filled the tabernacle.

40:35 And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the
congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the
LORD filled the tabernacle.

40:36 And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the
children of Israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 But if the
cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it
was taken up.

40:38 For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel,
throughout all their journeys.




The Third Book of Moses:  Called Leviticus


1:1 And the LORD called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 1:2 Speak unto the children of
Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an offering unto
the LORD, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the
herd, and of the flock.

1:3 If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD.

1:4 And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and
it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.

1:5 And he shall kill the bullock before the LORD: and the priests,
Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round
about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

1:6 And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.

1:7 And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,
and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 1:8 And the priests, Aaron's
sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the
wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:9 But his inwards
and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on
the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the LORD.

1:10 And if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of
the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without
blemish.

1:11 And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before
the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall sprinkle his blood
round about upon the altar.

1:12 And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat:
and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire
which is upon the altar: 1:13 But he shall wash the inwards and the
legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon
the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the LORD.

1:14 And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the LORD be of
fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young
pigeons.

1:15 And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his
head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung
out at the side of the altar: 1:16 And he shall pluck away his crop
with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by
the place of the ashes: 1:17 And he shall cleave it with the wings
thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it
upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt
sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

2:1 And when any will offer a meat offering unto the LORD, his
offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and
put frankincense thereon: 2:2 And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons
the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof;
and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: 2:3 And the
remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his sons': it is a
thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.

2:4 And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the
oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or
unleavened wafers anointed with oil.

2:5 And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be
of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.

2:6 Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat
offering.

2:7 And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it
shall be made of fine flour with oil.

2:8 And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these
things unto the LORD: and when it is presented unto the priest, he
shall bring it unto the altar.

2:9 And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial
thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

2:10 And that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and
his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made
by fire.

2:11 No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the LORD, shall be
made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any
offering of the LORD made by fire.

2:12 As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto
the LORD: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

2:13 And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with
salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to
be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt
offer salt.

2:14 And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the
LORD, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green
ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.

2:15 And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it
is a meat offering.

2:16 And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten
corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense
thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

3:1 And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer
it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it
without blemish before the LORD.

3:2 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons
the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

3:3 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:4 And the two
kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the
caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:5 And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt
sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

3:6 And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the
LORD be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without
blemish.

3:7 If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before
the LORD.

3:8 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons shall
sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:9 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat thereof, and the whole
rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that
covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:10
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
take away.

3:11 And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire unto the LORD.

3:12 And if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the
LORD.

3:13 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before
the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shall
sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.

3:14 And he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by
fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat
that is upon the inwards, 3:15 And the two kidneys, and the fat that
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver,
with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:16 And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the
LORD's.

3:17 It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout
all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.

4:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 4:2 Speak unto the children
of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any
of the commandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to
be done, and shall do against any of them: 4:3 If the priest that is
anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish
unto the LORD for a sin offering.

4:4 And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation before the LORD; and shall lay his hand upon the
bullock's head, and kill the bullock before the LORD.

4:5 And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock's blood,
and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:6 And the priest
shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven
times before the LORD, before the vail of the sanctuary.

4:7 And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the
altar of sweet incense before the LORD, which is in the tabernacle of
the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the
bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

4:8 And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the
sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that
is upon the inwards, 4:9 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon
them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the
kidneys, it shall he take away, 4:10 As it was taken off from the
bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn
them upon the altar of the burnt offering.

4:11 And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head,
and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, 4:12 Even the whole
bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place,
where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire:
where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.

4:13 And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance,
and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done
somewhat against any of the commandments of the LORD concerning things
which should not be done, and are guilty; 4:14 When the sin, which
they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall
offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle
of the congregation.

4:15 And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the
head of the bullock before the LORD: and the bullock shall be killed
before the LORD.

4:16 And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock's
blood to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:17 And the priest shall
dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times
before the LORD, even before the vail.

4:18 And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar
which is before the LORD, that is in the tabernacle of the
congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the
altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.

4:19 And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the
altar.

4:20 And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an
atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.

4:21 And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn
him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the
congregation.

4:22 When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
against any of the commandments of the LORD his God concerning things
which should not be done, and is guilty; 4:23 Or if his sin, wherein
he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a
kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 4:24 And he shall lay his
hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they
kill the burnt offering before the LORD: it is a sin offering.

4:25 And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt
offering.

4:26 And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the
sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement
for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:27 And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while
he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the LORD
concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty; 4:28 Or
if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall
bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for
his sin which he hath sinned.

4:29 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.

4:30 And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger,
and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall
pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.

4:31 And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken
away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall
burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD; and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:32 And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a
female without blemish.

4:33 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt
offering.

4:34 And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:
4:35 And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the
lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the
priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made
by fire unto the LORD: and the priest shall make an atonement for his
sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:1 And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a
witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it,
then he shall bear his iniquity.

5:2 Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of
an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of
unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall
be unclean, and guilty.

5:3 Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it
be that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he
knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.

5:4 Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do
good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it
be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one
of these.

5:5 And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things,
that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing: 5:6 And he
shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD for his sin which he
hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats,
for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him
concerning his sin.

5:7 And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his
trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, unto the LORD; one for a sin offering, and the other for a
burnt offering.

5:8 And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that
which is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his
neck, but shall not divide it asunder: 5:9 And he shall sprinkle of
the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest
of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a
sin offering.

5:10 And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to
the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin
which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:11 But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth
part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil
upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a
sin offering.

5:12 Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take
his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar,
according to the offerings made by fire unto the LORD: it is a sin
offering.

5:13 And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his
sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him:
and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.

5:14 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 5:15 If a soul commit a
trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD;
then he shall bring for his trespass unto the LORD a ram without
blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.

5:16 And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the
holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the
priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of
the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:17 And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are
forbidden to be done by the commandments of the LORD; though he wist
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.

5:18 And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with
thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance
wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:19 It is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against
the LORD.

6:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:2 If a soul sin, and
commit a trespass against the LORD, and lie unto his neighbour in that
which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken
away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour; 6:3 Or have found
that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in
any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: 6:4 Then it shall
be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that
which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully
gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing
which he found, 6:5 Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he
shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part
more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day
of his trespass offering.

6:6 And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD, a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: 6:7 And the priest shall make an atonement
for him before the LORD: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of
all that he hath done in trespassing therein.

6:8 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:9 Command Aaron and his
sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt offering: It is the burnt
offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.

6:10 And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen
breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the
fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall
put them beside the altar.

6:11 And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and
carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.

6:12 And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not
be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and
lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the
fat of the peace offerings.

6:13 The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go
out.

6:14 And this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall
offer it before the LORD, before the altar.

6:15 And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat
offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is
upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet
savour, even the memorial of it, unto the LORD.

6:16 And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with
unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of
the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

6:17 It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for
their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

6:18 All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It
shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the
offerings of the LORD made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall
be holy.

6:19 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:20 This is the offering
of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the LORD in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for
a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof
at night.

6:21 In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou
shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt
thou offer for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

6:22 And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall
offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the LORD; it shall be wholly
burnt.

6:23 For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it
shall not be eaten.

6:24 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:25 Speak unto Aaron and
to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place
where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed
before the LORD: it is most holy.

6:26 The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy
place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

6:27 Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt
wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place.

6:28 But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and
if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed
in water.

6:29 All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most
holy.

6:30 And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the
tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place,
shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.

7:1 Likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most
holy.

7:2 In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill
the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round
about upon the altar.

7:3 And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, 7:4 And the two kidneys, and the fat
that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above
the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away: 7:5 And the priest
shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the
LORD: it is a trespass offering.

7:6 Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten
in the holy place: it is most holy.

7:7 As the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one
law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have
it.

7:8 And the priest that offereth any man's burnt offering, even the
priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he
hath offered.

7:9 And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that
is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's
that offereth it.

7:10 And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the
sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.

7:11 And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
shall offer unto the LORD.

7:12 If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the
sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and
unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of
fine flour, fried.

7:13 Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread
with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.

7:14 And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an
heave offering unto the LORD, and it shall be the priest's that
sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.

7:15 And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for
thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall
not leave any of it until the morning.

7:16 But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary
offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his
sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten:
7:17 But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day
shall be burnt with fire.

7:18 And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings
be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither
shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an
abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.

7:19 And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten;
it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean
shall eat thereof.

7:20 But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
offerings, that pertain unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:21 Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the
uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean
thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which
pertain unto the LORD, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.

7:22 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 7:23 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or
of sheep, or of goat.

7:24 And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of
that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye
shall in no wise eat of it.

7:25 For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD, even the soul that eateth it
shall be cut off from his people.

7:26 Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl
or of beast, in any of your dwellings.

7:27 Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that
soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:28 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 7:29 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his
peace offerings unto the LORD shall bring his oblation unto the LORD
of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.

7:30 His own hands shall bring the offerings of the LORD made by fire,
the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
waved for a wave offering before the LORD.

7:31 And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
shall be Aaron's and his sons'.

7:32 And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave
offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.

7:33 He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace
offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.

7:34 For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the
children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings,
and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a
statute for ever from among the children of Israel.

7:35 This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the
anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the LORD made by fire,
in the day when he presented them to minister unto the LORD in the
priest's office; 7:36 Which the LORD commanded to be given them of the
children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for
ever throughout their generations.

7:37 This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and
of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings; 7:38 Which
the LORD commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded
the children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the LORD, in the
wilderness of Sinai.

8:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 8:2 Take Aaron and his sons
with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for
the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 8:3
And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

8:4 And Moses did as the LORD commanded him; and the assembly was
gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

8:5 And Moses said unto the congregation, This is the thing which the
LORD commanded to be done.

8:6 And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.

8:7 And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and
clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith.

8:8 And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the
breastplate the Urim and the Thummim.

8:9 And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon
his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the
LORD commanded Moses.

8:10 And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and
all that was therein, and sanctified them.

8:11 And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to
sanctify them.

8:12 And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and
anointed him, to sanctify him.

8:13 And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and
girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

8:14 And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin
offering.

8:15 And he slew it; and Moses took the blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the
altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified
it, to make reconciliation upon it.

8:16 And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul
above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned
it upon the altar.

8:17 But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt
with fire without the camp; as the LORD commanded Moses.

8:18 And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his
sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:19 And he killed it; and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar
round about.

8:20 And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the
pieces, and the fat.

8:21 And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt
the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet
savour, and an offering made by fire unto the LORD; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

8:22 And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron
and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:23 And he slew it; and Moses took of the blood of it, and put it
upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

8:24 And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the
tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and
upon the great toes of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled the blood
upon the altar round about.

8:25 And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon
the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and
their fat, and the right shoulder: 8:26 And out of the basket of
unleavened bread, that was before the LORD, he took one unleavened
cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the
fat, and upon the right shoulder: 8:27 And he put all upon Aaron's
hands, and upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave offering
before the LORD.

8:28 And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet
savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

8:29 And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering
before the LORD: for of the ram of consecration it was Moses' part; as
the LORD commanded Moses.

8:30 And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was
upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and
sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

8:31 And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the
bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying,
Aaron and his sons shall eat it.

8:32 And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye
burn with fire.

8:33 And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at
an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

8:34 As he hath done this day, so the LORD hath commanded to do, to
make an atonement for you.

8:35 Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the
LORD, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.

8:36 So Aaron and his sons did all things which the LORD commanded by
the hand of Moses.

9:1 And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and
his sons, and the elders of Israel; 9:2 And he said unto Aaron, Take
thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
without blemish, and offer them before the LORD.

9:3 And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye
a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of
the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 9:4 Also a
bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the LORD;
and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the LORD will appear
unto you.

9:5 And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tabernacle
of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood
before the LORD.

9:6 And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commanded that ye
should do: and the glory of the LORD shall appear unto you.

9:7 And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin
offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself,
and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an
atonement for them; as the LORD commanded.

9:8 Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself.

9:9 And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped
his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and
poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar: 9:10 But the fat, and
the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he
burnt upon the altar; as the LORD commanded Moses.

9:11 And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

9:12 And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.

9:13 And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces
thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

9:14 And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the
burnt offering on the altar.

9:15 And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat, which
was the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for
sin, as the first.

9:16 And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to
the manner.

9:17 And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof,
and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the
morning.

9:18 He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, which was for the people: and Aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 9:19 And
the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
9:20 And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon
the altar: 9:21 And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for
a wave offering before the LORD; as Moses commanded.

9:22 And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them,
and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt
offering, and peace offerings.

9:23 And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the LORD
appeared unto all the people.

9:24 And there came a fire out from before the LORD, and consumed upon
the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people
saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

10:1 And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered
strange fire before the LORD, which he commanded them not.

10:2 And there went out fire from the LORD, and devoured them, and
they died before the LORD.

10:3 Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the LORD spake,
saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.

10:4 And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the
uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren
from before the sanctuary out of the camp.

10:5 So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the
camp; as Moses had said.

10:6 And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his
sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the LORD hath kindled.

10:7 And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon
you. And they did according to the word of Moses.

10:8 And the LORD spake unto Aaron, saying, 10:9 Do not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for
ever throughout your generations: 10:10 And that ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 10:11 And that
ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the LORD
hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.

10:12 And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar,
his sons that were left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the
offerings of the LORD made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside
the altar: for it is most holy: 10:13 And ye shall eat it in the holy
place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of
the LORD made by fire: for so I am commanded.

10:14 And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be
thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of
peace offerings of the children of Israel.

10:15 The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
before the LORD; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
statute for ever; as the LORD hath commanded.

10:16 And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the
sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 Wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy,
and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the LORD?  10:18 Behold, the blood of
it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.

10:19 And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered
their sin offering and their burnt offering before the LORD; and such
things have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin offering to day,
should it have been accepted in the sight of the LORD?  10:20 And when
Moses heard that, he was content.

11:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them,
11:2 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts
which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.

11:3 Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

11:4 Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:5 And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:6 And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:7 And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted,
yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.

11:8 Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not
touch; they are unclean to you.

11:9 These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath
fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them
shall ye eat.

11:10 And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the
rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which
is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you: 11:11 They
shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their
flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination.

11:12 Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be
an abomination unto you.

11:13 And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the
fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle,
and the ossifrage, and the ospray, 11:14 And the vulture, and the kite
after his kind; 11:15 Every raven after his kind; 11:16 And the owl,
and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, 11:17
And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl, 11:18 And
the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle, 11:19 And the stork,
the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

11:20 All fowls that creep, going upon all four, shall be an
abomination unto you.

11:21 Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth
upon all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon
the earth; 11:22 Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his
kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his
kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.

11:23 But all other flying creeping things, which have four feet,
shall be an abomination unto you.

11:24 And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the
carcase of them shall be unclean until the even.

11:25 And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:26 The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not
clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one
that toucheth them shall be unclean.

11:27 And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts
that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their
carcase shall be unclean until the even.

11:28 And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.

11:29 These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things
that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise
after his kind, 11:30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the
lizard, and the snail, and the mole.

11:31 These are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth
touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.

11:32 And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall,
it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or
skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it
must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it
shall be cleansed.

11:33 And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth,
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.

11:34 Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh
shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel
shall be unclean.

11:35 And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth
shall be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall
be broken down: for they are unclean and shall be unclean unto you.

11:36 Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of
water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be
unclean.

11:37 And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which
is to be sown, it shall be clean.

11:38 But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their
carcase fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.

11:39 And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the
carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.

11:40 And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:41 And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination; it shall not be eaten.

11:42 Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all
four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an
abomination.

11:43 Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing
that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them,
that ye should be defiled thereby.

11:44 For I am the LORD your God: ye shall therefore sanctify
yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye
defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth.

11:45 For I am the LORD that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt,
to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.

11:46 This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 To make a difference between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten.

12:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 12:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days
of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.

12:3 And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised.

12:4 And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three
and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.

12:5 But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two
weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of
her purifying threescore and six days.

12:6 And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or
for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering,
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
12:7 Who shall offer it before the LORD, and make an atonement for
her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is
the law for her that hath born a male or a female.

12:8 And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
her, and she shall be clean.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, 13:2 When a man
shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he
shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the
priests: 13:3 And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of
the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the
plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him
unclean.

13:4 If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in
sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned
white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven
days: 13:5 And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread
not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:
13:6 And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in
the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and
he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.

13:7 But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he
hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of
the priest again.

13:8 And if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the
skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:9 When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought
unto the priest; 13:10 And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if
the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white,
and there be quick raw flesh in the rising; 13:11 It is an old leprosy
in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean,
and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.

13:12 And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to
his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh; 13:13 Then the priest shall
consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he
shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned
white: he is clean.

13:14 But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.

13:15 And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be
unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:16 Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he
shall come unto the priest; 13:17 And the priest shall see him: and,
behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.

13:18 The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil,
and is healed, 13:19 And in the place of the boil there be a white
rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be
shewed to the priest; 13:20 And if, when the priest seeth it, behold,
it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned
white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of
leprosy broken out of the boil.

13:21 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat
dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:22 And if it
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is a plague.

13:23 But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is
a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

13:24 Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot
burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot,
somewhat reddish, or white; 13:25 Then the priest shall look upon it:
and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be
in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the
burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the
plague of leprosy.

13:26 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but
be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:27
And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.

13:28 And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the
skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the
priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the
burning.

13:29 If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;
13:30 Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in
sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair;
then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a
leprosy upon the head or beard.

13:31 And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold,
it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black
hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of
the scall seven days: 13:32 And in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be
in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the
skin; 13:33 He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and
the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:
13:34 And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and,
behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper
than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall
wash his clothes, and be clean.

13:35 But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;
13:36 Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be
spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is
unclean.

13:37 But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is
black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the
priest shall pronounce him clean.

13:38 If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright
spots, even white bright spots; 13:39 Then the priest shall look: and,
behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish
white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.

13:40 And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet
is he clean.

13:41 And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head
toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.

13:42 And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white
reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald
forehead.

13:43 Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising
of the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald
forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh; 13:44 He
is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him
utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.

13:45 And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent,
and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry, Unclean, unclean.

13:46 All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be
defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall
his habitation be.

13:47 The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be
a woollen garment, or a linen garment; 13:48 Whether it be in the
warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any
thing made of skin; 13:49 And if the plague be greenish or reddish in
the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in
any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto
the priest: 13:50 And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut
up it that hath the plague seven days: 13:51 And he shall look on the
plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment,
either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that
is made of skin; the plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean.

13:52 He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in
woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for
it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.

13:53 And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not
spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any
thing of skin; 13:54 Then the priest shall command that they wash the
thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:
13:55 And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is
washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and
the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the
fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.

13:56 And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark
after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or
out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof: 13:57 And if
it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or
in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that
wherein the plague is with fire.

13:58 And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of
skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from
them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.

13:59 This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen
or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to
pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.

14:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 14:2 This shall be the law
of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the
priest: 14:3 And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the
priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in
the leper; 14:4 Then shall the priest command to take for him that is
to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop: 14:5 And the priest shall command that one of the birds be
killed in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:6 As for the living
bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the
hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the
bird that was killed over the running water: 14:7 And he shall
sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times,
and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose
into the open field.

14:8 And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave
off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and
after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of
his tent seven days.

14:9 But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his
hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he
shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his
flesh in water, and he shall be clean.

14:10 And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without
blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three
tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and
one log of oil.

14:11 And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that
is to be made clean, and those things, before the LORD, at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation: 14:12 And the priest shall take
one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of
oil, and wave them for a wave offering before the LORD: 14:13 And he
shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering
and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering is
the priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy: 14:14 And
the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and
the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is
to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the
great toe of his right foot: 14:15 And the priest shall take some of
the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand: 14:16
And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his
left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times
before the LORD: 14:17 And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand
shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering: 14:18
And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall pour
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make
an atonement for him before the LORD.

14:19 And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an
atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and
afterward he shall kill the burnt offering: 14:20 And the priest shall
offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.

14:21 And if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take
one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for
him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering, and a log of oil; 14:22 And two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin
offering, and the other a burnt offering.

14:23 And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto
the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
before the LORD.

14:24 And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and
the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering
before the LORD: 14:25 And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass
offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot: 14:26 And the priest shall pour of the oil into
the palm of his own left hand: 14:27 And the priest shall sprinkle
with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven
times before the LORD: 14:28 And the priest shall put of the oil that
is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe
of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass
offering: 14:29 And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand
he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an
atonement for him before the LORD.

14:30 And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 Even such as he is able to get, the
one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is
to be cleansed before the LORD.

14:32 This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.

14:33 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 14:34 When
ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a
possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
your possession; 14:35 And he that owneth the house shall come and
tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 Then the priest shall command that they empty the
house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go
in to see the house: 14:37 And he shall look on the plague, and,
behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow
strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;
14:38 Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the
house, and shut up the house seven days: 14:39 And the priest shall
come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague
be spread in the walls of the house; 14:40 Then the priest shall
command that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and
they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city: 14:41 And
he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they
shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an
unclean place: 14:42 And they shall take other stones, and put them in
the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall
plaister the house.

14:43 And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after
that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the
house, and after it is plaistered; 14:44 Then the priest shall come
and look, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a
fretting leprosy in the house; it is unclean.

14:45 And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the
timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry
them forth out of the city into an unclean place.

14:46 Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is
shut up shall be unclean until the even.

14:47 And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he
that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.

14:48 And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold,
the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was
plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because
the plague is healed.

14:49 And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 14:50 And he shall kill the one of the
birds in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:51 And he shall take
the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird,
and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water,
and sprinkle the house seven times: 14:52 And he shall cleanse the
house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with
the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 But he shall let go the living bird out of the
city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it
shall be clean.

14:54 This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 And for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 To teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.

15:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, 15:2 Speak
unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a
running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.

15:3 And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh
run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
uncleanness.

15:4 Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

15:5 And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:6 And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the
issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even.

15:7 And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:8 And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then
he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
until the even.

15:9 And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall
be unclean.

15:10 And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be
unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:11 And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not
rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:12 And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue,
shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.

15:13 And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he
shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.

15:14 And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or
two young pigeons, and come before the LORD unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 15:15
And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
him before the LORD for his issue.

15:16 And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he
shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:17 And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of
copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.

15:18 The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation,
they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:19 And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be
blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her
shall be unclean until the even.

15:20 And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.

15:21 And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:22 And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash
his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:23 And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth,
when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.

15:24 And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him,
he shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall
be unclean.

15:25 And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the
time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her
separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as
the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.

15:26 Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be
unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon
shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation.

15:27 And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:28 But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to
herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.

15:29 And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or
two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

15:30 And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
her before the LORD for the issue of her uncleanness.

15:31 Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their
uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
my tabernacle that is among them.

15:32 This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 15:33 And of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

16:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of
Aaron, when they offered before the LORD, and died; 16:2 And the LORD
said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all
times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which
is upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon
the mercy seat.

16:3 Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock
for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

16:4 He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen
breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and
with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments;
therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.

16:5 And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel
two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt
offering.

16:6 And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.

16:7 And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the LORD
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

16:8 And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
LORD, and the other lot for the scapegoat.

16:9 And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the LORD's lot fell,
and offer him for a sin offering.

16:10 But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall
be presented alive before the LORD, to make an atonement with him, and
to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.

16:11 And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his
house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for
himself: 16:12 And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of
fire from off the altar before the LORD, and his hands full of sweet
incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail: 16:13 And he shall
put the incense upon the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the
incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he
die not: 16:14 And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and
sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before
the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven
times.

16:15 Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the
people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as
he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy
seat, and before the mercy seat: 16:16 And he shall make an atonement
for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of
Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so
shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth
among them in the midst of their uncleanness.

16:17 And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation
when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come
out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household,
and for all the congregation of Israel.

16:18 And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the LORD, and
make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock,
and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar
round about.

16:19 And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven
times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the
children of Israel.

16:20 And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and
the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the
live goat: 16:21 And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of
the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of
a fit man into the wilderness: 16:22 And the goat shall bear upon him
all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go
the goat in the wilderness.

16:23 And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went
into the holy place, and shall leave them there: 16:24 And he shall
wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments,
and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering
of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people.

16:25 And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.

16:26 And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the
camp.

16:27 And the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin
offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy
place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in
the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.

16:28 And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.

16:29 And this shall be a statute for ever unto you: that in the
seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your
souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country,
or a stranger that sojourneth among you: 16:30 For on that day shall
the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be
clean from all your sins before the LORD.

16:31 It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict
your souls, by a statute for ever.

16:32 And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall
consecrate to minister in the priest's office in his father's stead,
shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the
holy garments: 16:33 And he shall make an atonement for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

16:34 And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an
atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year.
And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.

17:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 17:2 Speak unto Aaron, and
unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them;
This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, saying, 17:3 What man
soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb,
or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, 17:4 And
bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to offer an offering unto the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD;
blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man
shall be cut off from among his people: 17:5 To the end that the
children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the
open field, even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them
for peace offerings unto the LORD.

17:6 And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the
LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the
fat for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

17:7 And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after
whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto
them throughout their generations.

17:8 And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the
house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that
offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice, 17:9 And bringeth it not unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the
LORD; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.

17:10 And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I
will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will
cut him off from among his people.

17:11 For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it
to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is
the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.

17:12 Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you
shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you
eat blood.

17:13 And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast
or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof,
and cover it with dust.

17:14 For it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life
thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat
the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the
blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.

17:15 And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that
which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or
a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

17:16 But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear
his iniquity.

18:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 18:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the LORD your God.

18:3 After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring
you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

18:4 Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein: I am the LORD your God.

18:5 Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a
man do, he shall live in them: I am the LORD.

18:6 None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
uncover their nakedness: I am the LORD.

18:7 The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother,
shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness.

18:8 The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is
thy father's nakedness.

18:9 The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or
daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad,
even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

18:10 The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's
daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is
thine own nakedness.

18:11 The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy
father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

18:12 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she
is thy father's near kinswoman.

18:13 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister: for
she is thy mother's near kinswoman.

18:14 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother,
thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.

18:15 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she
is thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

18:16 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it
is thy brother's nakedness.

18:17 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her
daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her
daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near
kinswomen: it is wickedness.

18:18 Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to
uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.

18:19 Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her
nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

18:20 Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife,
to defile thyself with her.

18:21 And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.

18:22 Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination.

18:23 Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself
therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down
thereto: it is confusion.

18:24 Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all
these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you: 18:25 And
the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon
it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.

18:26 Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall
not commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation,
nor any stranger that sojourneth among you: 18:27 (For all these
abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and
the land is defiled;) 18:28 That the land spue not you out also, when
ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.

18:29 For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the
souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

18:30 Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any
one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and
that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the LORD your God.

19:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 19:2 Speak unto all the
congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be
holy: for I the LORD your God am holy.

19:3 Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
sabbaths: I am the LORD your God.

19:4 Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am
the LORD your God.

19:5 And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD, ye
shall offer it at your own will.

19:6 It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow:
and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the
fire.

19:7 And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it
shall not be accepted.

19:8 Therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity,
because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the LORD: and that soul
shall be cut off from among his people.

19:9 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly
reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings
of thy harvest.

19:10 And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather
every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and
stranger: I am the LORD your God.

19:11 Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another.

19:12 And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.

19:13 Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages
of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning.

19:14 Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before
the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD.

19:15 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty:
but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.

19:16 Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people:
neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour; I am the
LORD.

19:17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in
any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

19:18 Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children
of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the
LORD.

19:19 Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender
with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed:
neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.

19:20 And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid,
betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given
her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because
she was not free.

19:21 And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD, unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass
offering.

19:22 And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of
the trespass offering before the LORD for his sin which he hath done:
and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.

19:23 And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all
manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as
uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it
shall not be eaten of.

19:24 But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to
praise the LORD withal.

19:25 And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it
may yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the LORD your God.

19:26 Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use
enchantment, nor observe times.

19:27 Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou
mar the corners of thy beard.

19:28 Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor
print any marks upon you: I am the LORD.

19:29 Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest
the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.

19:30 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the
LORD.

19:31 Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the LORD your God.

19:32 Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of
the old man, and fear thy God: I am the LORD.

19:33 And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not
vex him.

19:34 But the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one
born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

19:35 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in
weight, or in measure.

19:36 Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
ye have: I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of
Egypt.

19:37 Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my
judgments, and do them: I am the LORD.

20:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 20:2 Again, thou shalt say
to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of the children of Israel,
or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his
seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the
land shall stone him with stones.

20:3 And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off
from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto Molech,
to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.

20:4 And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from
the man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not:
20:5 Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family,
and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
whoredom with Molech, from among their people.

20:6 And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits,
and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face
against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

20:7 Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the LORD
your God.

20:8 And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I am the LORD which
sanctify you.

20:9 For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be
surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his
blood shall be upon him.

20:10 And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife,
even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

20:11 And the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his
father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their
blood shall be upon them.

20:12 And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall
surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall
be upon them.

20:13 If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both
of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:14 And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they
shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no
wickedness among you.

20:15 And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death:
and ye shall slay the beast.

20:16 And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto,
thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:17 And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or
his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his
nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the
sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he
shall bear his iniquity.

20:18 And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and
shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she
hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be
cut off from among their people.

20:19 And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister,
nor of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall
bear their iniquity.

20:20 And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered
his uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die
childless.

20:21 And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean
thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be
childless.

20:22 Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments,
and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue
you not out.

20:23 And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast
out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore I
abhorred them.

20:24 But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I
will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and
honey: I am the LORD your God, which have separated you from other
people.

20:25 Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and
unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make
your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living
thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as
unclean.

20:26 And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the LORD am holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with
stones: their blood shall be upon them.

21:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of
Aaron, and say unto them, There shall none be defiled for the dead
among his people: 21:2 But for his kin, that is near unto him, that
is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his
daughter, and for his brother.

21:3 And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his
people, to profane himself.

21:5 They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they
shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their
flesh.

21:6 They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of
their God: for the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and the bread
of their God, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.

21:7 They shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither
shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto
his God.

21:8 Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of
thy God: he shall be holy unto thee: for I the LORD, which sanctify
you, am holy.

21:9 And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing
the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.

21:10 And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose
head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on
the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes; 21:11
Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his
father, or for his mother; 21:12 Neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD.

21:13 And he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to
wife.

21:15 Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the
LORD do sanctify him.

21:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 21:17 Speak unto Aaron,
saying, Whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.

21:18 For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
thing superfluous, 21:19 Or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken; 21:21
No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.

21:22 He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of
the holy.

21:23 Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries:
for I the LORD do sanctify them.

21:24 And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of Israel.

22:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 22:2 Speak unto Aaron and
to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the
children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those
things which they hallow unto me: I am the LORD.

22:3 Say unto them, Whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of
Israel hallow unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, that
soul shall be cut off from my presence: I am the LORD.

22:4 What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a
running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean.
And whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man
whose seed goeth from him; 22:5 Or whosoever toucheth any creeping
thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take
uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath; 22:6 The soul which hath
touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the
holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.

22:7 And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward
eat of the holy things; because it is his food.

22:8 That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not
eat to defile himself therewith; I am the LORD.

22:9 They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for
it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the LORD do sanctify
them.

22:10 There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of
the priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.

22:11 But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of
it, and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.

22:12 If the priest's daughter also be married unto a stranger, she
may not eat of an offering of the holy things.

22:13 But if the priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have
no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth,
she shall eat of her father's meat: but there shall be no stranger eat
thereof.

22:14 And if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest
with the holy thing.

22:15 And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
Israel, which they offer unto the LORD; 22:16 Or suffer them to bear
the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for I the
LORD do sanctify them.

22:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 22:18 Speak unto Aaron,
and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto
them, Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in
Israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his
freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the LORD for a burnt
offering; 22:19 Ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20 But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it
shall not be acceptable for you.

22:21 And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the
LORD to accomplish his vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep,
it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.

22:22 Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or
scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the LORD, nor make an offering
by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD.

22:23 Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or
lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering;
but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

22:24 Ye shall not offer unto the LORD that which is bruised, or
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof
in your land.

22:25 Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your
God of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and
blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

22:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 22:27 When a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accepted for an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

22:28 And whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
LORD, offer it at your own will.

22:30 On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
until the morrow: I am the LORD.

22:31 Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the
LORD.

22:32 Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed
among the children of Israel: I am the LORD which hallow you, 22:33
That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the
LORD.

23:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the
LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are
my feasts.

23:3 Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings.

23:4 These are the feasts of the LORD, even holy convocations, which
ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

23:5 In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the LORD's
passover.

23:6 And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleavened bread unto the LORD: seven days ye must eat unleavened
bread.

23:7 In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do
no servile work therein.

23:8 But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD seven
days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:9 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:10 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land
which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the
priest: 23:11 And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be
accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wave it.

23:12 And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the LORD.

23:13 And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the LORD for a
sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the
fourth part of an hin.

23:14 And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green
ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto
your God: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.

23:15 And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven
sabbaths shall be complete: 23:16 Even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offering unto the LORD.

23:17 Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two
tenth deals; they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with
leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the LORD.

23:18 And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of
the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for
a burnt offering unto the LORD, with their meat offering, and their
drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto
the LORD.

23:19 Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering,
and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.

23:20 And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits
for a wave offering before the LORD, with the two lambs: they shall be
holy to the LORD for the priest.

23:21 And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it
shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

23:22 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the LORD your God.

23:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:24 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of
the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets,
an holy convocation.

23:25 Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD.

23:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:27 Also on the tenth
day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and
offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

23:28 And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
atonement, to make an atonement for you before the LORD your God.

23:29 For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that
same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

23:30 And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,
the same soul will I destroy from among his people.

23:31 Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

23:32 It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto
even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

23:33 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:34 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month
shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the LORD.

23:35 On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:36 Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
LORD: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye
shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a solemn
assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.

23:37 These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be
holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD, a
burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings,
every thing upon his day: 23:38 Beside the sabbaths of the LORD, and
beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
freewill offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.

23:39 Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD
seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
shall be a sabbath.

23:40 And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly
trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God
seven days.

23:41 And ye shall keep it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the
year.

It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 That your generations may know that
I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

23:44 And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the
LORD.

24:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 24:2 Command the children
of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

24:3 Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
before the LORD continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations.

24:4 He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the
LORD continually.

24:5 And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof:
two tenth deals shall be in one cake.

24:6 And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
table before the LORD.

24:7 And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may
be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the
LORD.

24:8 Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the LORD
continually, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting
covenant.

24:9 And it shall be Aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in
the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the
LORD made by fire by a perpetual statute.

24:10 And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an
Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the
Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp;
24:11 And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord,
and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name
was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:) 24:12 And
they put him in ward, that the mind of the LORD might be shewed them.

24:13 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 24:14 Bring forth him
that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.

24:15 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying,
Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.

24:16 And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD, he shall surely be
put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as
well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, shall be put to death.

24:17 And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.

24:18 And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

24:19 And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done,
so shall it be done to him; 24:20 Breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be
done to him again.

24:21 And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for I am the LORD your God.

24:23 And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. And the children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.

25:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying, 25:2 Speak
unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the
land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
LORD.

25:3 Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt
prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 25:4 But in the
seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for
the LORD: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.

25:5 That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt
not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a
year of rest unto the land.

25:6 And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and
for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for
thy stranger that sojourneth with thee.

25:7 And for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall
all the increase thereof be meat.

25:8 And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven
times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall
be unto thee forty and nine years.

25:9 Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the
tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make
the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

25:10 And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be
a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession,
and ye shall return every man unto his family.

25:11 A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow,
neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes
in it of thy vine undressed.

25:12 For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat
the increase thereof out of the field.

25:13 In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his
possession.

25:14 And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of
thy neighbour's hand, ye shall not oppress one another: 25:15
According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of
thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he
shall sell unto thee: 25:16 According to the multitude of years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number
of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.

25:17 Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear
thy God:for I am the LORD your God.

25:18 Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

25:19 And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.

25:20 And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold,
we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 25:21 Then I will
command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years.

25:22 And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until
the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old
store.

25:23 The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine, for
ye are strangers and sojourners with me.

25:24 And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a
redemption for the land.

25:25 If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his
possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he
redeem that which his brother sold.

25:26 And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to
redeem it; 25:27 Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and
restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may
return unto his possession.

25:28 But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is
sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the
year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return
unto his possession.

25:29 And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may
redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may
he redeem it.

25:30 And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then
the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to
him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in
the jubile.

25:31 But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about
them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be
redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.

25:32 Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the
cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time.

25:33 And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was
sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of
jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their
possession among the children of Israel.

25:34 But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold;
for it is their perpetual possession.

25:35 And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee.

25:36 Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that
thy brother may live with thee.

25:37 Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.

25:38 I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land
of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.

25:39 And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
25:40 But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with
thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile.

25:41 And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return.

25:42 For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land
of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

25:43 Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy
God.

25:44 Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have,
shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids.

25:45 Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you,
which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

25:46 And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after
you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for
ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule
one over another with rigour.

25:47 And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother
that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or
sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family: 25:48
After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren
may redeem him: 25:49 Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem
him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him;
or if he be able, he may redeem himself.

25:50 And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that
he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale
shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of
an hired servant shall it be with him.

25:51 If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall
give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was
bought for.

25:52 And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then
he shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give
him again the price of his redemption.

25:53 And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the
other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.

25:54 And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out
in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.

25:55 For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my
servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD
your God.

26:1 Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up
a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
land, to bow down unto it: for I am the LORD your God.

26:2 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the
LORD.

26:3 If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
26:4 Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

26:5 And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage
shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the
full, and dwell in your land safely.

26:6 And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the
land, neither shall the sword go through your land.

26:7 And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you
by the sword.

26:8 And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you
shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before
you by the sword.

26:9 For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and
multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

26:10 And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of
the new.

26:11 And I set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor
you.

26:12 And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be
my people.

26:13 I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land
of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the
bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

26:14 But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments; 26:15 And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your
soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant: 26:16 I also will do this unto you; I
will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague,
that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall
sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.

26:17 And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall
flee when none pursueth you.

26:18 And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will
punish you seven times more for your sins.

26:19 And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your
heaven as iron, and your earth as brass: 26:20 And your strength shall
be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither
shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.

26:21 And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I
will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.

26:22 I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of
your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number;
and your high ways shall be desolate.

26:23 And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me; 26:24 Then will I also walk contrary unto you,
and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

26:25 And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities,
I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into
the hand of the enemy.

26:26 And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall
bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread
again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

26:27 And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk
contrary unto me; 26:28 Then I will walk contrary unto you also in
fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.

26:29 And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat.

26:30 And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images,
and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul
shall abhor you.

26:31 And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.

26:32 And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies
which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.

26:33 And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a
sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities
waste.

26:34 Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth
desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land
rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

26:35 As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not
rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

26:36 And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness
into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a
sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

26:37 And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword,
when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your
enemies.

26:38 And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your
enemies shall eat you up.

26:39 And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity
in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers
shall they pine away with them.

26:40 If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 And that I also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 Then will I
remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and
also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the
land.

26:43 The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the LORD their
God.

26:45 But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.

26:46 These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the LORD
made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand
of Moses.

27:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 27:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a
singular vow, the persons shall be for the LORD by thy estimation.

27:3 And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old
even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels
of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

27:4 And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty
shekels.

27:5 And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then
thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female
ten shekels.

27:6 And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy
estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the
female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.

27:7 And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male,
then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten
shekels.

27:8 But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present
himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according
to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.

27:9 And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the
LORD, all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD shall be holy.

27:10 He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad
for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and
the exchange thereof shall be holy.

27:11 And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
sacrifice unto the LORD, then he shall present the beast before the
priest: 27:12 And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or
bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.

27:13 But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part
thereof unto thy estimation.

27:14 And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the
LORD, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as
the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.

27:15 And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he
shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and
it shall be his.

27:16 And if a man shall sanctify unto the LORD some part of a field
of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed
thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of
silver.

27:17 If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to
thy estimation it shall stand.

27:18 But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest
shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain,
even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy
estimation.

27:19 And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it,
then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto
it, and it shall be assured to him.

27:20 And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the
field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.

27:21 But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy
unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the
priest's.

27:22 And if a man sanctify unto the LORD a field which he hath
bought, which is not of the fields of his possession; 27:23 Then the
priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto
the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that
day, as a holy thing unto the LORD.

27:24 In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of
whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did
belong.

27:25 And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.

27:26 Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the LORD's
firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is
the LORD's.

27:27 And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it
according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it
thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to
thy estimation.

27:28 Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto
the LORD of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field
of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is
most holy unto the LORD.

27:29 None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed;
but shall surely be put to death.

27:30 And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land,
or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD's: it is holy unto the LORD.

27:31 And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.

27:32 And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of
whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
LORD.

27:33 He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change
thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

27:34 These are the commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses for
the children of Israel in mount Sinai.




The Fourth Book of Moses:  Called Numbers


1:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
saying, 1:2 Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the
number of their names, every male by their polls; 1:3 From twenty
years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel:
thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head
of the house of his fathers.

1:5 And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of
the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.

1:6 Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

1:7 Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

1:8 Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

1:9 Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.

1:10 Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of
Ammihud: of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

1:11 Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.

1:12 Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

1:13 Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.

1:14 Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

1:15 Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.

1:16 These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.

1:17 And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their
names: 1:18 And they assembled all the congregation together on the
first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 As the LORD commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the
wilderness of Sinai.

1:20 And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1:21 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben,
were forty and six thousand and five hundred.

1:22 Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of
them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
war; 1:23 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of
Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.

1:24 Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:25 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.

1:26 Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:27 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

1:28 Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:29 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

1:30 Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:31 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

1:32 Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war; 1:33 Those that
were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

1:34 Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:35 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.

1:36 Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:37 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.

1:38 Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:39 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

1:40 Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:41 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
go forth to war; 1:43 Those that were numbered of them, even of the
tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron
numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was
for the house of his fathers.

1:45 So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel,
by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in Israel; 1:46 Even all they that
were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty.

1:47 But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.

1:48 For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, saying, 1:49 Only thou shalt
not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of Israel: 1:50 But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over
all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle.

1:51 And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take
it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall
set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

1:52 And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

1:54 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses, so did they.

2:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 2:2 Every
man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.

2:3 And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and
Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of
Judah.

2:4 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

2:5 And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the
children of Issachar.

2:6 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
four thousand and four hundred.

2:7 Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be
captain of the children of Zebulun.

2:8 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
seven thousand and four hundred.

2:9 All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred,
throughout their armies. These shall first set forth.

2:10 On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben
according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben
shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.

2:11 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty
and six thousand and five hundred.

2:12 And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and
the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai.

2:13 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred.

2:14 Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall
be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.

2:15 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.

2:16 All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty,
throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank.

2:17 Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with
the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so
shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.

2:18 On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim
according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim
shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.

2:19 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

2:20 And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the
children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

2:21 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and two thousand and two hundred.

2:22 Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of
Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.

2:23 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and five thousand and four hundred.

2:24 All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies.
And they shall go forward in the third rank.

2:25 The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by
their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer
the son of Ammishaddai.

2:26 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

2:27 And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the
captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.

2:28 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred.

2:29 Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of
Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.

2:30 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred.

2:31 All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go
hindmost with their standards.

2:32 These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by
the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty.

2:33 But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel;
as the LORD commanded Moses.

2:34 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers.

3:1 These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that
the LORD spake with Moses in mount Sinai.

3:2 And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn,
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

3:3 These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.

3:4 And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, when they offered
strange fire before the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had
no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office
in the sight of Aaron their father.

3:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:6 Bring the tribe of Levi
near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him.

3:7 And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:8 And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:9 And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they
are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.

3:10 And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death.

3:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:12 And I, behold, I have
taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel:
therefore the Levites shall be mine; 3:13 Because all the firstborn
are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and
beast: mine shall they be: I am the LORD.

3:14 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
3:15 Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by
their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou
number them.

3:16 And Moses numbered them according to the word of the LORD, as he
was commanded.

3:17 And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and
Kohath, and Merari.

3:18 And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families;
Libni, and Shimei.

3:19 And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar,
Hebron, and Uzziel.

3:20 And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These
are the families of the Levites according to the house of their
fathers.

3:21 Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the
Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites.

3:22 Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all
the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered
of them were seven thousand and five hundred.

3:23 The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle
westward.

3:24 And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall
be Eliasaph the son of Lael.

3:25 And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the
congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering
thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, 3:26 And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for
the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar
round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.

3:27 And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of
the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of
the Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites.

3:28 In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were
eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.

3:29 The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacle southward.

3:30 And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the
Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.

3:31 And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.

3:32 And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
charge of the sanctuary.

3:33 Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the
Mushites: these are the families of Merari.

3:34 And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of
all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
hundred.

3:35 And the chief of the house of the father of the families of
Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of
the tabernacle northward.

3:36 And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 And the pillars of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

3:38 But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses,
and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the
charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.

3:39 All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron
numbered at the commandment of the LORD, throughout their families,
all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two
thousand.

3:40 And the LORD said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take
the number of their names.

3:41 And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the LORD) instead of
all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the
Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children
of Israel.

3:42 And Moses numbered, as the LORD commanded him, all the firstborn
among the children of Israel.

3:43 And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month
old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and
two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.

3:44 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:45 Take the Levites
instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the
cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall
be mine: I am the LORD.

3:46 And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel,
which are more than the Levites; 3:47 Thou shalt even take five
shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 3:48 And thou shalt
give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto Aaron and to his sons.

3:49 And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the Levites: 3:50 Of the firstborn of
the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and
threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to
his sons, according to the word of the LORD, as the LORD commanded
Moses.

4:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 4:2 Take the
sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, 4:3 From thirty years old and
upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.

4:4 This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle
of the congregation, about the most holy things: 4:5 And when the camp
setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take
down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it: 4:6
And shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall spread
over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.

4:7 And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon: 4:8 And
they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same
with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves
thereof.

4:9 And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of
the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all
the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it: 4:10 And
they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of
badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar.

4:11 And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and
cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put to the
staves thereof: 4:12 And they shall take all the instruments of
ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and
shall put them on a bar: 4:13 And they shall take away the ashes from
the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon: 4:14 And they shall put
upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it,
even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all
the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of
badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.

4:15 And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are
the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:16 And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessels thereof.

4:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying, 4:18 Cut ye
not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the
Levites: 4:19 But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall
go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
4:20 But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
lest they die.

4:21 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 4:22 Take also the sum of
the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their
families; 4:23 From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old
shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to
do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.

4:24 This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve,
and for burdens: 4:25 And they shall bear the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and
the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the
hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, 4:26 And
the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of
the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about,
and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all
that is made for them: so shall they serve.

4:27 At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service
of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.

4:28 This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the
tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the
hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

4:29 As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their
families, by the house of their fathers; 4:30 From thirty years old
and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one
that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of
the congregation.

4:31 And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their
service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the
tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 And the pillars of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden.

4:33 This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari,
according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation,
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

4:34 And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 From thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:36 And those that were
numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and
fifty.

4:37 These were they that were numbered of the families of the
Kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according to the
commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

4:38 And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout
their families, and by the house of their fathers, 4:39 From thirty
years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that
entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:40 Even those that were numbered of them, throughout
their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and
six hundred and thirty.

4:41 These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of
Gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number according to the
commandment of the LORD.

4:42 And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
Merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, 4:43
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one
that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:44 Even those that were numbered of them after their
families, were three thousand and two hundred.

4:45 These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the
LORD by the hand of Moses.

4:46 All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron
and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the
house of their fathers, 4:47 From thirty years old and upward even
unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the
ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:48 Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and
five hundred and fourscore, 4:49 According to the commandment of the
LORD they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one according to
his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of
him, as the LORD commanded Moses.

5:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 5:2 Command the children of
Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that
hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead: 5:3 Both male and
female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they
defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.

5:4 And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the
camp: as the LORD spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.

5:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 5:6 Speak unto the children
of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit,
to do a trespass against the LORD, and that person be guilty; 5:7 Then
they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall
recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it
the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath
trespassed.

5:8 But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto,
let the trespass be recompensed unto the LORD, even to the priest;
beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made
for him.

5:9 And every offering of all the holy things of the children of
Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.

5:10 And every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man
giveth the priest, it shall be his.

5:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 5:12 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man's wife go aside, and
commit a trespass against him, 5:13 And a man lie with her carnally,
and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she
be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken
with the manner; 5:14 And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he
be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of
jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not
defiled: 5:15 Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and
he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of
barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense
thereon; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial,
bringing iniquity to remembrance.

5:16 And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the LORD:
5:17 And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of
the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take,
and put it into the water: 5:18 And the priest shall set the woman
before the LORD, and uncover the woman's head, and put the offering of
memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest
shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:19
And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If
no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to
uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from
this bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:20 But if thou hast gone
aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and
some man have lain with thee beside thine husband: 5:21 Then the
priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest
shall say unto the woman, The LORD make thee a curse and an oath among
thy people, when the LORD doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to
swell; 5:22 And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy
bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: And the
woman shall say, Amen, amen.

5:23 And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall
blot them out with the bitter water: 5:24 And he shall cause the woman
to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that
causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter.

5:25 Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the
woman's hand, and shall wave the offering before the LORD, and offer
it upon the altar: 5:26 And the priest shall take an handful of the
offering, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and
afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.

5:27 And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come
to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her
husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her,
and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot:
and the woman shall be a curse among her people.

5:28 And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be
free, and shall conceive seed.

5:29 This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another
instead of her husband, and is defiled; 5:30 Or when the spirit of
jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall
set the woman before the LORD, and the priest shall execute upon her
all this law.

5:31 Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman
shall bear her iniquity.

6:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:2 Speak unto the children
of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall separate
themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the
LORD: 6:3 He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and
shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither
shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.

6:4 All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made
of the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.

6:5 All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he
separateth himself unto the LORD, he shall be holy, and shall let the
locks of the hair of his head grow.

6:6 All the days that he separateth himself unto the LORD he shall
come at no dead body.

6:7 He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his
mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the
consecration of his God is upon his head.

6:8 All the days of his separation he is holy unto the LORD.

6:9 And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the
head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of
his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.

6:10 And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 6:11 And the priest shall offer the one for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement
for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head
that same day.

6:12 And he shall consecrate unto the LORD the days of his separation,
and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but
the days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was
defiled.

6:13 And this is the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his
separation are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation: 6:14 And he shall offer his offering
unto the LORD, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a
burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for
a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peace offerings, 6:15
And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with
oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat
offering, and their drink offerings.

6:16 And the priest shall bring them before the LORD, and shall offer
his sin offering, and his burnt offering: 6:17 And he shall offer the
ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD, with the basket
of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

6:18 And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of
the head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the
sacrifice of the peace offerings.

6:19 And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one
unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall
put them upon the hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his
separation is shaven: 6:20 And the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before the LORD: this is holy for the priest, with the wave
breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.

6:21 This is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his
offering unto the LORD for his separation, beside that that his hand
shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after
the law of his separation.

6:22 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:23 Speak unto Aaron and
unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of
Israel, saying unto them, 6:24 The LORD bless thee, and keep thee:
6:25 The LORD make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee: 6:26 The LORD lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

6:27 And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel, and I
will bless them.

7:1 And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the
instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and
had anointed them, and sanctified them; 7:2 That the princes of
Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of
the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered: 7:3 And
they brought their offering before the LORD, six covered wagons, and
twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox:
and they brought them before the tabernacle.

7:4 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 7:5 Take it of them, that
they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to
his service.

7:6 And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the
Levites.

7:7 Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon,
according to their service: 7:8 And four wagons and eight oxen he gave
unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the hand
of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

7:9 But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of
the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their
shoulders.

7:10 And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day
that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before
the altar.

7:11 And the LORD said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering,
each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.

7:12 And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the
son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah: 7:13 And his offering was one
silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering: 7:14 One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense: 7:15
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering: 7:16 One kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:17 And for a
sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five
lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nahshon the son of
Amminadab.

7:18 On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar,
did offer: 7:19 He offered for his offering one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:20 One spoon of
gold of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:21 One young bullock, one ram,
one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:22 One kid of the
goats for a sin offering: 7:23 And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

7:24 On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children
of Zebulun, did offer: 7:25 His offering was one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:26 One golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:27 One young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:28 One kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:29 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.

7:30 On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the
children of Reuben, did offer: 7:31 His offering was one silver
charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of
them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:32 One
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:33 One young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:34 One
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:35 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.

7:36 On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the
children of Simeon, did offer: 7:37 His offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:38 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:39 One young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:40 One kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:41 And for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai.

7:42 On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the
children of Gad, offered: 7:43 His offering was one silver charger of
the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:44 One golden spoon of
ten shekels, full of incense: 7:45 One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:46 One kid of the
goats for a sin offering: 7:47 And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

7:48 On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the
children of Ephraim, offered: 7:49 His offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:50 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:51 One young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:52 One kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:53 And for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.

7:54 On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of
the children of Manasseh: 7:55 His offering was one silver charger of
the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:56 One golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:57 One young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:58 One kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:59 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

7:60 On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the
children of Benjamin, offered: 7:61 His offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:62 One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:63 One young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:64 One kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:65 And for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.

7:66 On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the
children of Dan, offered: 7:67 His offering was one silver charger,
the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:68 One
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:69 One young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:70 One
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:71 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

7:72 On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the
children of Asher, offered: 7:73 His offering was one silver charger,
the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:74 One
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:75 One young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:76 One
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:77 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.

7:78 On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children
of Naphtali, offered: 7:79 His offering was one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:80 One golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:81 One young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:82 One kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:83 And for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.

7:84 This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was
anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve
silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold: 7:85 Each charger of silver
weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the
silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after
the shekel of the sanctuary: 7:86 The golden spoons were twelve, full
of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the
sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty
shekels.

7:87 All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the
rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat
offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.

7:88 And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were
twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the
lambs of the first year sixty. This was the dedication of the altar,
after that it was anointed.

7:89 And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation
to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him
from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from
between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.

8:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 8:2 Speak unto Aaron and
say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give
light over against the candlestick.

8:3 And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
candlestick, as the LORD commanded Moses.

8:4 And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the
shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according
unto the pattern which the LORD had shewed Moses, so he made the
candlestick.

8:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 8:6 Take the Levites from
among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.

8:7 And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water
of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let
them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.

8:8 Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even
fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take
for a sin offering.

8:9 And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children
of Israel together: 8:10 And thou shalt bring the Levites before the
LORD: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the
Levites: 8:11 And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the LORD for an
offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service
of the LORD.

8:12 And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the
bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering, unto the LORD, to make an atonement for
the Levites.

8:13 And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons,
and offer them for an offering unto the LORD.

8:14 Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of
Israel: and the Levites shall be mine.

8:15 And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the
tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer
them for an offering.

8:16 For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of
Israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the
firstborn of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me.

8:17 For all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, both
man and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of
Egypt I sanctified them for myself.

8:18 And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the
children of Israel.

8:19 And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons
from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children
of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an
atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among
the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the
sanctuary.

8:20 And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
Israel, did to the Levites according unto all that the LORD commanded
Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.

8:21 And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and
Aaron offered them as an offering before the LORD; and Aaron made an
atonement for them to cleanse them.

8:22 And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the
tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as
the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto
them.

8:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 8:24 This is it that
belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward
they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 8:25 And from the age of fifty years they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more: 8:26 But
shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the
congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt
thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.

9:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the
first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of
Egypt, saying, 9:2 Let the children of Israel also keep the passover
at his appointed season.

9:3 In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in
his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according
to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.

9:4 And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep
the passover.

9:5 And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that the
LORD commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.

9:6 And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a
man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came
before Moses and before Aaron on that day: 9:7 And those men said unto
him, We are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept
back, that we may not offer an offering of the LORD in his appointed
season among the children of Israel?  9:8 And Moses said unto them,
Stand still, and I will hear what the LORD will command concerning
you.

9:9 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 9:10 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity
shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar
off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the LORD.

9:11 The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep
it, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.

9:12 They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone
of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep
it.

9:13 But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off
from among his people: because he brought not the offering of the LORD
in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.

9:14 And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
passover unto the LORD; according to the ordinance of the passover,
and according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one
ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the
land.

9:15 And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud
covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even
there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until
the morning.

9:16 So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance
of fire by night.

9:17 And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after
that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the
cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents.

9:18 At the commandment of the LORD the children of Israel journeyed,
and at the commandment of the LORD they pitched: as long as the cloud
abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents.

9:19 And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days,
then the children of Israel kept the charge of the LORD, and journeyed
not.

9:20 And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle;
according to the commandment of the LORD they abode in their tents,
and according to the commandment of the LORD they journeyed.

9:21 And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning,
and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed:
whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they
journeyed.

9:22 Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the
cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of
Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken
up, they journeyed.

9:23 At the commandment of the LORD they rested in the tents, and at
the commandment of the LORD they journeyed: they kept the charge of
the LORD, at the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

10:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 10:2 Make thee two
trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou
mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the
journeying of the camps.

10:3 And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall
assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

10:4 And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which
are heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto
thee.

10:5 When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts
shall go forward.

10:6 When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on
the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for
their journeys.

10:7 But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall
blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.

10:8 And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets;
and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations.

10:9 And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye
shall be remembered before the LORD your God, and ye shall be saved
from your enemies.

10:10 Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and
in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over
your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings;
that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the LORD
your God.

10:11 And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in
the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle
of the testimony.

10:12 And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the
wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.

10:13 And they first took their journey according to the commandment
of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

10:14 In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children
of Judah according to their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the
son of Amminadab.

10:15 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was
Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

10:16 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was
Eliab the son of Helon.

10:17 And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and
the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.

10:18 And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to
their armies: and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.

10:19 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

10:20 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was
Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

10:21 And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the
other did set up the tabernacle against they came.

10:22 And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set
forward according to their armies: and over his host was Elishama the
son of Ammihud.

10:23 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

10:24 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was
Abidan the son of Gideoni.

10:25 And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward,
which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and
over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

10:26 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was
Pagiel the son of Ocran.

10:27 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was
Ahira the son of Enan.

10:28 Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to
their armies, when they set forward.

10:29 And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite,
Moses' father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the
LORD said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee
good: for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.

10:30 And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine
own land, and to my kindred.

10:31 And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to
us instead of eyes.

10:32 And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what
goodness the LORD shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

10:33 And they departed from the mount of the LORD three days'
journey: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them in
the three days' journey, to search out a resting place for them.

10:34 And the cloud of the LORD was upon them by day, when they went
out of the camp.

10:35 And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said,
Rise up, LORD, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that
hate thee flee before thee.

10:36 And when it rested, he said, Return, O LORD, unto the many
thousands of Israel.

11:1 And when the people complained, it displeased the LORD: and the
LORD heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the LORD
burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts
of the camp.

11:2 And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the
LORD, the fire was quenched.

11:3 And he called the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of
the LORD burnt among them.

11:4 And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and
the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us
flesh to eat?  11:5 We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt
freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions,
and the garlick: 11:6 But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing
at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.

11:7 And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as
the colour of bdellium.

11:8 And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in
mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of
it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.

11:9 And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell
upon it.

11:10 Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families,
every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the LORD was
kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.

11:11 And Moses said unto the LORD, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy
servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou
layest the burden of all this people upon me?  11:12 Have I conceived
all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto
me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking
child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?  11:13
Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep
unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.

11:14 I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me.

11:15 And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of
hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my
wretchedness.

11:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the
elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people,
and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

11:17 And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take
of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
thyself alone.

11:18 And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to
morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the
LORD, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us
in Egypt: therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

11:19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither
ten days, nor twenty days; 11:20 But even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye
have despised the LORD which is among you, and have wept before him,
saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?  11:21 And Moses said, The
people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou
hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

11:22 Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice
them?  or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them,
to suffice them?  11:23 And the LORD said unto Moses, Is the LORD's
hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee or not.

11:24 And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the LORD,
and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them
round about the tabernacle.

11:25 And the LORD came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took
of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and
Medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.

11:29 And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God
that all the LORD's people were prophets, and that the LORD would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 And Moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of Israel.

11:31 And there went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other
side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the
face of the earth.

11:32 And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and
all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least
gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the
LORD smote the people with a very great plague.

11:34 And he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah: because
there they buried the people that lusted.

11:35 And the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth;
and abode at Hazeroth.

12:1 And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.

12:2 And they said, Hath the LORD indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? And the LORD heard it.

12:3 (Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 And the LORD spake suddenly unto
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.

12:5 And the LORD came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both
came forth.

12:6 And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you,
I the LORD will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

12:8 With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the LORD shall he behold:
wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
12:9 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them; and he
departed.

12:10 And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.

12:11 And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, Heal her now, O God, I
beseech thee.

12:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

12:15 And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.

12:16 And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in
the wilderness of Paran.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 13:2 Send thou men, that
they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of
Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one
a ruler among them.

13:3 And Moses by the commandment of the LORD sent them from the
wilderness of Paran: all those men were heads of the children of
Israel.

13:4 And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the
son of Zaccur.

13:5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.

13:6 Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

13:7 Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.

13:8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.

13:9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.

13:10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.

13:11 Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi
the son of Susi.

13:12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.

13:13 Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.

13:14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.

13:15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.

13:16 These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the
land.

And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.

13:17 And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto
them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
13:18 And see the land, what it is, and the people that dwelleth
therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 13:19 And what
the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what
cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong
holds; 13:20 And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether
there be wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of
the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe
grapes.

13:21 So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of
Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.

13:22 And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where
Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron
was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)  13:23 And they came unto
the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of
grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.

13:25 And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

13:26 And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran,
to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

13:27 And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
fruit of it.

13:28 Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and
the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the
children of Anak there.

13:29 The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites,
and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.

13:30 And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go
up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.

13:31 But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up
against the people; for they are stronger than we.

13:32 And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against
Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we
had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 And wherefore hath the LORD brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?  14:4 And they
said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into
Egypt.

14:5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the congregation of the children of Israel.

14:6 And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes: 14:7 And they
spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The
land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.

14:8 If the LORD delight in us, then he will bring us into this land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 Only rebel not ye against the LORD, neither fear ye the people of
the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from
them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not.

14:10 But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the
glory of the LORD appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation
before all the children of Israel.

14:11 And the LORD said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke
me?  and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs
which I have shewed among them?  14:12 I will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
nation and mightier than they.

14:13 And Moses said unto the LORD, Then the Egyptians shall hear it,
(for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
14:14 And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they
have heard that thou LORD art among this people, that thou LORD art
seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that
thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a
pillar of fire by night.

14:15 Now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the
nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, 14:16
Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which
he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.

14:17 And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my LORD be great,
according as thou hast spoken, saying, 14:18 The LORD is
longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation.

14:19 Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according
unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this
people, from Egypt even until now.

14:20 And the LORD said, I have pardoned according to thy word: 14:21
But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory
of the LORD.

14:22 Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles,
which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice; 14:23 Surely they
shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that provoked me see it: 14:24 But my servant Caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.)
Tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the
Red sea.

14:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 14:27 How
long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against
me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the LORD, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you: 14:29 Your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14:30 Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I
sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun.

14:31 But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will
I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

14:32 But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness.

14:33 And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.

14:34 After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

14:35 I the LORD have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land, 14:37 Even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, died by the plague before the LORD.

14:38 But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

14:39 And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel:
and the people mourned greatly.

14:40 And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
place which the LORD hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the LORD? but it shall not prosper.

14:42 Go not up, for the LORD is not among you; that ye be not smitten
before your enemies.

14:43 For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and
ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the LORD,
therefore the LORD will not be with you.

14:44 But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the
camp.

14:45 Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.

15:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land
of your habitations, which I give unto you, 15:3 And will make an
offering by fire unto the LORD, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in
performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts,
to make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the herd or of the flock:
15:4 Then shall he that offereth his offering unto the LORD bring a
meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of
an hin of oil.

15:5 And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt
thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.

15:6 Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth
deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.

15:7 And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an
hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

15:8 And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a
sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the LORD: 15:9
Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth
deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.

15:10 And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine,
for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

15:11 Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a
lamb, or a kid.

15:12 According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to
every one according to their number.

15:13 All that are born of the country shall do these things after
this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the LORD.

15:14 And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in
your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do.

15:15 One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever
in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the
LORD.

15:16 One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.

15:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:18 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land
whither I bring you, 15:19 Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the LORD.

15:20 Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall
ye heave it.

15:21 Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the LORD an heave
offering in your generations.

15:22 And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments,
which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses, 15:23 Even all that the LORD
hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD
commanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations; 15:24 Then
it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge
of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young
bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the LORD, with
his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner,
and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.

15:25 And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation
of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is
ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by
fire unto the LORD, and their sin offering before the LORD, for their
ignorance: 15:26 And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them;
seeing all the people were in ignorance.

15:27 And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she
goat of the first year for a sin offering.

15:28 And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth
ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the LORD, to make an
atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

15:29 Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance,
both for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the
stranger that sojourneth among them.

15:30 But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the LORD; and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people.

15:31 Because he hath despised the word of the LORD, and hath broken
his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity
shall be upon him.

15:32 And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

15:33 And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses
and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what
should be done to him.

15:35 And the LORD said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to
death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the
camp.

15:36 And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the LORD commanded Moses.

15:37 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:38 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the
borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: 15:39 And it
shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember
all the commandments of the LORD, and do them; and that ye seek not
after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
be holy unto your God.

15:41 I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of
Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God.

16:1 Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi,
and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth,
sons of Reuben, took men: 16:2 And they rose up before Moses, with
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 And they
gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them: wherefore then
lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the LORD?  16:4 And
when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face: 16:5 And he spake unto
Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the LORD will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
him.

16:6 This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company; 16:7 And
put fire therein, and put incense in them before the LORD to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the LORD doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

16:8 And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:
16:9 Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel
hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 And he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 For which cause
both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the LORD:
and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 And Moses sent
to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not
come up: 16:13 Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?  16:14 Moreover
thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
eyes of these men? we will not come up.

16:15 And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the LORD, Respect not
thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have
I hurt one of them.

16:16 And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before
the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow: 16:17 And take every
man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the LORD
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and
Aaron, each of you his censer.

16:18 And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with Moses and Aaron.

16:19 And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the LORD
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 16:21
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
all the congregation?  16:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
16:24 Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the
tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

16:25 And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the
elders of Israel followed him.

16:26 And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of their's, lest
ye be consumed in all their sins.

16:27 So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door
of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
children.

16:28 And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the LORD hath sent me
to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.

16:29 If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men; then the LORD hath not sent
me.

16:30 But if the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
provoked the LORD.

16:31 And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these
words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them: 16:32 And
the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.

16:33 They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
congregation.

16:34 And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them: for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 And there came out a fire from the LORD, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

16:36 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:37 Speak unto Eleazar
the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered
them before the LORD, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of Israel.

16:39 And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a
covering of the altar: 16:40 To be a memorial unto the children of
Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near
to offer incense before the LORD; that he be not as Korah, and as his
company: as the LORD said to him by the hand of Moses.

16:41 But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the LORD.

16:42 And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
LORD appeared.

16:43 And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.

16:44 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:45 Get you up from
among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And
they fell upon their faces.

16:46 And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the LORD; the plague is begun.

16:47 And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

16:48 And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
stayed.

16:49 Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.

16:50 And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the plague was stayed.

17:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 17:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to
the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the
house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon
his rod.

17:3 And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

17:4 And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, where I will meet with you.

17:5 And it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom I shall
choose, shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings
of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you.

17:6 And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of
their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 And Moses laid up the rods before the LORD in the tabernacle of
witness.

17:8 And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the
tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of
Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
yielded almonds.

17:9 And Moses brought out all the rods from before the LORD unto all
the children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

17:10 And the LORD said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

17:11 And Moses did so: as the LORD commanded him, so did he.

17:12 And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the LORD
shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  18:1 And the LORD said
unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee
shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

18:2 And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and
minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister
before the tabernacle of witness.

18:3 And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the
tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary
and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.

18:4 And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the
tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle:
and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.

18:5 And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of
the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of
Israel.

18:6 And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among
the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the LORD,
to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:7 Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's
office for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall
serve: I have given your priest's office unto you as a service of
gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

18:8 And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the
charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the
children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the
anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.

18:9 This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the
fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and
every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs
which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for
thy sons.

18:10 In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat
it: it shall be holy unto thee.

18:11 And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all
the wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto
thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for
ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

18:12 All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of
the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the
LORD, them have I given thee.

18:13 And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
unto the LORD, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house
shall eat of it.

18:14 Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.

18:15 Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they
bring unto the LORD, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine:
nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the
firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.

18:16 And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou
redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.

18:17 But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the
firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt
sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an
offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

18:18 And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as
the right shoulder are thine.

18:19 All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children
of Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt
for ever before the LORD unto thee and to thy seed with thee.

18:20 And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in
their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part
and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.

18:21 And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in
Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:22 Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

18:23 But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children
of Israel they have no inheritance.

18:24 But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an
heave offering unto the LORD, I have given to the Levites to inherit:
therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they
shall have no inheritance.

18:25 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 18:26 Thus speak unto the
Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the
tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the LORD, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of
the winepress.

18:28 Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the LORD of all
your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall
give thereof the LORD's heave offering to Aaron the priest.

18:29 Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the
LORD, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of
it.

18:30 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best
thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the
increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

18:31 And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

18:32 And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of
the children of Israel, lest ye die.

19:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 19:2 This
is the ordinance of the law which the LORD hath commanded, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
19:4 And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,
and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the
congregation seven times: 19:5 And one shall burn the heifer in his
sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he
burn: 19:6 And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and
scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.

19:7 Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the
priest shall be unclean until the even.

19:8 And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and
bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.

19:9 And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer,
and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be
kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of
separation: it is a purification for sin.

19:10 And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the
children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them,
for a statute for ever.

19:11 He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven
days.

19:12 He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the
seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third
day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.

19:13 Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and
purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the LORD; and that
soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was
not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet
upon him.

19:14 This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into
the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

19:15 And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is
unclean.

19:16 And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the
open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be
unclean seven days.

19:17 And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the
burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put
thereto in a vessel: 19:18 And a clean person shall take hyssop, and
dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the
vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that
touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave: 19:19 And the
clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on
the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at
even.

19:20 But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself,
that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he
hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD: the water of separation hath
not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.

19:21 And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that
sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that
toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

19:22 And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in
Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.

20:3 And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God
that we had died when our brethren died before the LORD!  20:4 And why
have ye brought up the congregation of the LORD into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 And wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto them.

20:7 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 20:8 Take the rod, and
gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

20:9 And Moses took the rod from before the LORD, as he commanded him.

20:10 And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch
you water out of this rock?  20:11 And Moses lifted up his hand, and
with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

20:12 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given
them.

20:13 This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel
strove with the LORD, and he was sanctified in them.

20:14 And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom,
Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have
dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our
fathers: 20:16 And when we cried unto the LORD, he heard our voice,
and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and,
behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border: 20:17
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass
through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of
the water of the wells: we will go by the king's high way, we will not
turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy
borders.

20:18 And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come
out against thee with the sword.

20:19 And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high
way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for
it: I will only, without doing anything else, go through on my feet.

20:20 And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border:
wherefore Israel turned away from him.

20:22 And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.

20:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the
coast of the land of Edom, saying, 20:24 Aaron shall be gathered unto
his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given
unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at
the water of Meribah.

20:25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount
Hor: 20:26 And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar
his son: and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die
there.

20:27 And Moses did as the LORD commanded: and they went up into mount
Hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon
Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and
Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they
mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.

21:1 And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
Israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy
their cities.

21:3 And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up
the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and
he called the name of the place Hormah.

21:4 And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to
compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way.

21:5 And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore
have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 And the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit
the people; and much people of Israel died.

21:7 Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for
we have spoken against the LORD, and against thee; pray unto the LORD,
that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the
people.

21:8 And the LORD said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set
it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

21:9 And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the
serpent of brass, he lived.

21:10 And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.

21:11 And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the
wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrising.

21:12 From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.

21:13 From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of
Arnon, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the
Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the
Amorites.

21:14 Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the LORD, What
he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon, 21:15 And at the
stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth
upon the border of Moab.

21:16 And from thence they went to Beer: that is the well whereof the
LORD spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give
them water.

21:17 Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:
21:18 The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it,
by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the
wilderness they went to Mattanah: 21:19 And from Mattanah to Nahaliel:
and from Nahaliel to Bamoth: 21:20 And from Bamoth in the valley, that
is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward
Jeshimon.

21:21 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites,
saying, 21:22 Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the
fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink of the waters of the
well: but we will go along by the king's high way, until we be past
thy borders.

21:23 And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border:
but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against
Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against
Israel.

21:24 And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed
his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for
the border of the children of Ammon was strong.

21:25 And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the
cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.

21:26 For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who
had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out
of his hand, even unto Arnon.

21:27 Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon,
let the city of Sihon be built and prepared: 21:28 For there is a fire
gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed
Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon.

21:29 Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath
given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto
Sihon king of the Amorites.

21:30 We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and
we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.

21:31 Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.

21:32 And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages
thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.

21:33 And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the
king of Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the
battle at Edrei.

21:34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered
him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at
Heshbon.

21:35 So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there
was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.

22:1 And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains
of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.

22:2 And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the
Amorites.

22:3 And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many:
and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.

22:4 And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company
lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of
the field.

And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time.

22:5 He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to
Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his
people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from
Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over
against me: 22:6 Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this
people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail,
that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for
I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest
is cursed.

22:7 And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the
rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and
spake unto him the words of Balak.

22:8 And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring
you word again, as the LORD shall speak unto me: and the princes of
Moab abode with Balaam.

22:9 And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?
22:10 And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab,
hath sent unto me, saying, 22:11 Behold, there is a people come out of
Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them;
peradventure I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.

22:12 And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou
shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.

22:13 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of
Balak, Get you into your land: for the LORD refuseth to give me leave
to go with you.

22:14 And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and
said, Balaam refuseth to come with us.

22:15 And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than
they.

22:16 And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the
son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto
me: 22:17 For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will
do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse
me this people.

22:18 And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If
Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go
beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do less or more.

22:19 Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I
may know what the LORD will say unto me more.

22:20 And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men
come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I
shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

22:21 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went
with the princes of Moab.

22:22 And God's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of
the LORD stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was
riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.

22:23 And the ass saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and
his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way,
and went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into
the way.

22:24 But the angel of the LORD stood in a path of the vineyards, a
wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.

22:25 And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she thrust herself
unto the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall: and he
smote her again.

22:26 And the angel of the LORD went further, and stood in a narrow
place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the
left.

22:27 And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she fell down under
Balaam: and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a
staff.

22:28 And the LORD opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto
Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
three times?  22:29 And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast
mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I
kill thee.

22:30 And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which
thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont
to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.

22:31 Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of
the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he
bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face.

22:32 And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Wherefore hast thou
smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand
thee, because thy way is perverse before me: 22:33 And the ass saw me,
and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me,
surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.

22:34 And Balaam said unto the angel of the LORD, I have sinned; for I
knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if
it displease thee, I will get me back again.

22:35 And the angel of the LORD said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but
only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So
Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

22:36 And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet
him unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in
the utmost coast.

22:37 And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee
to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed
to promote thee to honour?  22:38 And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am
come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word
that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.

22:39 And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.

22:40 And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the
princes that were with him.

22:41 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and
brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see
the utmost part of the people.

23:1 And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.

23:2 And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered
on every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:3 And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I
will go: peradventure the LORD will come to meet me: and whatsoever he
sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to an high place.

23:4 And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven
altars, and I have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 And the LORD put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return unto
Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

23:6 And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab.

23:7 And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath
brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come,
curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.

23:8 How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy,
whom the LORD hath not defied?  23:9 For from the top of the rocks I
see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

23:10 Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou
done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou
hast blessed them altogether.

23:12 And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that
which the LORD hath put in my mouth?  23:13 And Balak said unto him,
Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest
see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not
see them all: and curse me them from thence.

23:14 And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of
Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on
every altar.

23:15 And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while
I meet the LORD yonder.

23:16 And the LORD met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said,
Go again unto Balak, and say thus.

23:17 And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering,
and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath
the LORD spoken?  23:18 And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up,
Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor: 23:19 God is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?  23:20 Behold, I have received commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it.

23:21 He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen
perverseness in Israel: the LORD his God is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.

23:23 Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said
of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!  23:24 Behold, the
people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.

23:25 And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless
them at all.

23:26 But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee,
saying, All that the LORD speaketh, that I must do?  23:27 And Balak
said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another
place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them
from thence.

23:28 And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh
toward Jeshimon.

23:29 And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

23:30 And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a
ram on every altar.

24:1 And when Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he
went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his
face toward the wilderness.

24:2 And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his
tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.

24:3 And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:4 He hath said,
which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open: 24:5 How goodly are
thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!  24:6 As the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the
trees of lign aloes which the LORD hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters.

24:7 He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be
in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.

24:8 God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and
shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.

24:9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.

24:10 And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his
hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse
mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these
three times.

24:11 Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee
unto great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath kept thee back from honour.

24:12 And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers
which thou sentest unto me, saying, 24:13 If Balak would give me his
house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of
the LORD, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the LORD
saith, that will I speak?  24:14 And now, behold, I go unto my people:
come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall do to
thy people in the latter days.

24:15 And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor
hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:16 He hath
said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most
High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but
having his eyes open: 24:17 I shall see him, but not now: I shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a
Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab,
and destroy all the children of Sheth.

24:18 And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.

24:20 And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
Amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that
he perish for ever.

24:21 And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said,
Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.

24:22 Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall
carry thee away captive.

24:23 And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when
God doeth this!  24:24 And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim,
and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and
Balak also went his way.

25:1 And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab.

25:2 And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and
the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

25:3 And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the
LORD was kindled against Israel.

25:4 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people,
and hang them up before the LORD against the sun, that the fierce
anger of the LORD may be turned away from Israel.

25:5 And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his
men that were joined unto Baalpeor.

25:6 And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto
his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the
sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were
weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

25:7 And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in his hand; 25:8 And he went after the man of Israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the
woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of
Israel.

25:9 And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

25:10 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:11 Phinehas, the son
of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away
from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.

25:12 Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:
25:13 And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and
made an atonement for the children of Israel.

25:14 Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was
slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince
of a chief house among the Simeonites.

25:15 And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi,
the daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in Midian.

25:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:17 Vex the Midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of
Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plague for Peor's sake.

26:1 And it came to pass after the plague, that the LORD spake unto
Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 Take
the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty
years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
able to go to war in Israel.

26:3 And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 26:4 Take the sum of the people,
from twenty years old and upward; as the LORD commanded Moses and the
children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt.

26:5 Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch,
of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of
the Palluites: 26:6 Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi,
the family of the Carmites.

26:7 These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and
thirty.

26:8 And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.

26:9 And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is
that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who
strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when
they strove against the LORD: 26:10 And the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died,
what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.

26:12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family
of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin,
the family of the Jachinites: 26:13 Of Zerah, the family of the
Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.

26:14 These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two
thousand and two hundred.

26:15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family
of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the
family of the Shunites: 26:16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of
Eri, the family of the Erites: 26:17 Of Arod, the family of the
Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.

26:18 These are the families of the children of Gad according to those
that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.

26:19 The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the
land of Canaan.

26:20 And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the
family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of
Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.

26:21 And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the
Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

26:22 These are the families of Judah according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.

26:23 Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the
family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites: 26:24 Of
Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the
Shimronites.

26:25 These are the families of Issachar according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.

26:26 Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the
family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of
Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

26:27 These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those
that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.

26:28 The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and
Ephraim.

26:29 Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the
Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the
Gileadites.

26:30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the
Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites: 26:31 And of
Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of
the Shechemites: 26:32 And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites:
and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

26:33 And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and
the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah,
Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

26:34 These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered
of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of
Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of
the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

26:36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the
Eranites.

26:37 These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those
that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.
These are the sons of Joseph after their families.

26:38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family
of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram,
the family of the Ahiramites: 26:39 Of Shupham, the family of the
Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

26:40 And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of
the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.

26:41 These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they
that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six
hundred.

26:42 These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the
family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their
families.

26:43 All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were
numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.

26:44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the
family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of
Beriah, the family of the Beriites.

26:45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of
Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.

26:46 And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.

26:47 These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those
that were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four
hundred.

26:48 Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the
family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites: 26:49
Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the
Shillemites.

26:50 These are the families of Naphtali according to their families:
and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and
four hundred.

26:51 These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:52 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 26:53 Unto these the land
shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.

26:54 To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be
given according to those that were numbered of him.

26:55 Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to
the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.

26:56 According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided
between many and few.

26:57 And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their
families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the
family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.

26:58 These are the families of the Levites: the family of the
Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites,
the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath
begat Amram.

26:59 And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi,
whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron
and Moses, and Miriam their sister.

26:60 And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

26:61 And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before
the LORD.

26:62 And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not
numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of Israel.

26:63 These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the
priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by
Jordan near Jericho.

26:64 But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the
wilderness of Sinai.

26:65 For the LORD had said of them, They shall surely die in the
wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son
of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

27:1 Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son
of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of
Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.

27:2 And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 Our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 Why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a possession
among the brethren of our father.

27:5 And Moses brought their cause before the LORD.

27:6 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 27:7 The daughters of
Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an
inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the
inheritance of their father to pass unto them.

27:8 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a
man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass
unto his daughter.

27:9 And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his brethren.

27:10 And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his father's brethren.

27:11 And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a
statute of judgment, as the LORD commanded Moses.

27:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount
Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of
Israel.

27:13 And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness
of Zin.

27:15 And Moses spake unto the LORD, saying, 27:16 Let the LORD, the
God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the LORD be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 And set
him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge in their sight.

27:20 And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.

27:21 And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the LORD: at his
word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 And Moses did as the LORD commanded him: and he took Joshua, and
set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
27:23 And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.

28:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 28:2 Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire
which ye shall offer unto the LORD; two lambs of the first year
without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

28:4 The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
shalt thou offer at even; 28:5 And a tenth part of an ephah of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten
oil.

28:6 It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount
Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

28:7 And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin
for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine
to be poured unto the LORD for a drink offering.

28:8 And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering
of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer
it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

28:9 And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot,
and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil,
and the drink offering thereof: 28:10 This is the burnt offering of
every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:11 And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt
offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs
of the first year without spot; 28:12 And three tenth deals of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth
deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
28:13 And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a
sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

28:14 And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a
bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of
an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month
throughout the months of the year.

28:15 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the LORD shall
be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:16 And in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of
the LORD.

28:17 And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days
shall unleavened bread be eaten.

28:18 In the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no
manner of servile work therein: 28:19 But ye shall offer a sacrifice
made by fire for a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks,
and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you
without blemish: 28:20 And their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and
two tenth deals for a ram; 28:21 A several tenth deal shalt thou offer
for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 28:22 And one goat for a
sin offering, to make an atonement for you.

28:23 Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning,
which is for a continual burnt offering.

28:24 After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven
days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the LORD: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and
his drink offering.

28:25 And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye
shall do no servile work.

28:26 Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat
offering unto the LORD, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy
convocation; ye shall do no servile work: 28:27 But ye shall offer the
burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; two young bullocks,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year; 28:28 And their meat offering
of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two
tenth deals unto one ram, 28:29 A several tenth deal unto one lamb,
throughout the seven lambs; 28:30 And one kid of the goats, to make an
atonement for you.

28:31 Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his
meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their
drink offerings.

29:1 And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall
have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of
blowing the trumpets unto you.

29:2 And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the
LORD; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year
without blemish: 29:3 And their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals
for a ram, 29:4 And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven
lambs: 29:5 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an
atonement for you: 29:6 Beside the burnt offering of the month, and
his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat
offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for
a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

29:7 And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy
convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work
therein: 29:8 But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD for a
sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first
year; they shall be unto you without blemish: 29:9 And their meat
offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a
bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram, 29:10 A several tenth deal
for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 29:11 One kid of the goats
for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink
offerings.

29:12 And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an
holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a
feast unto the LORD seven days: 29:13 And ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD;
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first
year; they shall be without blemish: 29:14 And their meat offering
shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the
two rams, 29:15 And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen
lambs: 29:16 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:17 And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two
rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot: 29:18 And their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:19 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their
drink offerings.

29:20 And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish; 29:21 And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:22 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:23 And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish: 29:24 Their meat offering and their
drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:25 And one
kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:26 And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without spot: 29:27 And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:28 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:29 And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:30 And their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:31 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:32 And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:33 And their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:34 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:35 On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do
no servile work therein: 29:36 But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a
sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:37 Their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram,
and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:38 And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual
burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:39 These things ye shall do unto the LORD in your set feasts,
beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings,
and for your peace offerings.

29:40 And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the
LORD commanded Moses.

30:1 And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the
children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD hath
commanded.

30:2 If a man vow a vow unto the LORD, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.

30:3 If a woman also vow a vow unto the LORD, and bind herself by a
bond, being in her father's house in her youth; 30:4 And her father
hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her
father shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.

30:5 But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not
any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul,
shall stand: and the LORD shall forgive her, because her father
disallowed her.

30:6 And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered
ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; 30:7 And her
husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard
it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her
soul shall stand.

30:8 But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it;
then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered
with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the
LORD shall forgive her.

30:9 But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith
they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

30:10 And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a
bond with an oath; 30:11 And her husband heard it, and held his peace
at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

30:12 But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he
heard them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her
vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband
hath made them void; and the LORD shall forgive her.

30:13 Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her
husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

30:14 But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to
day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are
upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the
day that he heard them.

30:15 But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

30:16 These are the statutes, which the LORD commanded Moses, between
a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in
her youth in her father's house.

31:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:2 Avenge the children
of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy
people.

31:3 And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves
unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the
LORD of Midian.

31:4 Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel,
shall ye send to the war.

31:5 So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a
thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

31:6 And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

31:7 And they warred against the Midianites, as the LORD commanded
Moses; and they slew all the males.

31:8 And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that
were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five
kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.

31:9 And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives,
and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
their flocks, and all their goods.

31:10 And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all
their goodly castles, with fire.

31:11 And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and
of beasts.

31:12 And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by
Jordan near Jericho.

31:13 And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14 And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from
the battle.

31:15 And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
31:16 Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel
of Balaam, to commit trespass against the LORD in the matter of Peor,
and there was a plague among the congregation of the LORD.

31:17 Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill
every woman that hath known man by lying with him.

31:18 But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying
with him, keep alive for yourselves.

31:19 And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath
killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both
yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.

31:20 And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and
all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.

31:21 And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
the battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD commanded
Moses; 31:22 Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
tin, and the lead, 31:23 Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall
make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it
shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

31:24 And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall
be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

31:25 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:26 Take the sum of the
prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the
priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation: 31:27 And divide
the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who
went out to battle, and between all the congregation: 31:28 And levy a
tribute unto the Lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one
soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of
the asses, and of the sheep: 31:29 Take it of their half, and give it
unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the LORD.

31:30 And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one
portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of
the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites,
which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.

31:31 And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD commanded
Moses.

31:32 And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five
thousand sheep, 31:33 And threescore and twelve thousand beeves, 31:34
And threescore and one thousand asses, 31:35 And thirty and two
thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with
him.

31:36 And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to
war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundred sheep: 31:37 And the LORD's tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.

31:38 And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the LORD's
tribute was threescore and twelve.

31:39 And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which
the LORD's tribute was threescore and one.

31:40 And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the LORD's
tribute was thirty and two persons.

31:41 And Moses gave the tribute, which was the LORD's heave offering,
unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD commanded Moses.

31:42 And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided from
the men that warred, 31:43 (Now the half that pertained unto the
congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven
thousand and five hundred sheep, 31:44 And thirty and six thousand
beeves, 31:45 And thirty thousand asses and five hundred, 31:46 And
sixteen thousand persons;) 31:47 Even of the children of Israel's
half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of
the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

31:48 And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:
31:49 And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the
men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man
of us.

31:50 We have therefore brought an oblation for the LORD, what every
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the
LORD.

31:51 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels.

31:52 And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds,
was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.

31:53 (For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
31:54 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of
the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the
LORD.

32:1 Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very
great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and
the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
32:2 The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake
unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah,
and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon, 32:4 Even
the country which the LORD smote before the congregation of Israel, is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle: 32:5 Wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto
thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.

32:6 And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of
Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?  32:7
And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from
going over into the land which the LORD hath given them?  32:8 Thus
did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they
should not go into the land which the LORD had given them.

32:10 And the LORD's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and
Joshua the son of Nun: for they have wholly followed the LORD.

32:13 And the LORD's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed.

32:14 And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward
Israel.

32:15 For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them
in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.

32:16 And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds
here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones: 32:17 But we
ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we
have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in
the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.

32:18 We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel
have inherited every man his inheritance.

32:19 For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or
forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan
eastward.

32:20 And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will
go armed before the LORD to war, 32:21 And will go all of you armed
over Jordan before the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from
before him, 32:22 And the land be subdued before the LORD: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the LORD, and
before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the LORD.

32:23 But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
LORD: and be sure your sin will find you out.

32:24 Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

32:25 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto
Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of Gilead: 32:27 But thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and
Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel: 32:29 And Moses said unto them, If the children of
Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every
man armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession: 32:30 But if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.

32:31 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered,
saying, As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

32:32 We will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be
ours.

32:33 And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to
the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of
Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of
Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about.

32:34 And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
32:35 And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah, 32:36 And
Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.

32:37 And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and
Kirjathaim, 32:38 And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,)
and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.

32:39 And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead,
and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.

32:40 And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havothjair.

32:42 And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it Nobah, after his own name.

33:1 These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went
forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of
Moses and Aaron.

33:2 And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the LORD: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out.

33:3 And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
Egyptians.

33:4 For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the LORD had
smitten among them: upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments.

33:5 And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in
Succoth.

33:6 And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in
the edge of the wilderness.

33:7 And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth,
which is before Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol.

33:8 And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.

33:9 And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were
twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they
pitched there.

33:10 And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.

33:11 And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the
wilderness of Sin.

33:12 And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and
encamped in Dophkah.

33:13 And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.

33:14 And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was
no water for the people to drink.

33:15 And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness
of Sinai.

33:16 And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah.

33:17 And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at
Hazeroth.

33:18 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.

33:19 And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez.

33:20 And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah.

33:21 And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.

33:22 And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.

33:23 And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.

33:24 And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.

33:25 And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.

33:26 And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.

33:27 And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.

33:28 And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.

33:29 And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.

33:30 And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.

33:31 And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan.

33:32 And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad.

33:33 And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.

33:34 And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.

33:35 And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber.

33:36 And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness
of Zin, which is Kadesh.

33:37 And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the
edge of the land of Edom.

33:38 And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment
of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children
of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month.

33:39 And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he
died in mount Hor.

33:40 And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.

33:41 And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.

33:42 And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.

33:43 And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.

33:44 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the
border of Moab.

33:45 And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad.

33:46 And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim.

33:47 And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the
mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

33:48 And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.

33:49 And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto
Abelshittim in the plains of Moab.

33:50 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho, saying, 33:51 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
33:52 Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places: 33:53 And
ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein:
for I have given you the land to possess it.

33:54 And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among
your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and
to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's
inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to
the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.

33:55 But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.

33:56 Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I
thought to do unto them.

34:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:2 Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:) 34:3 Then your south
quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of
Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be
from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and
pass on to Azmon: 34:5 And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon
unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.

34:6 And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea
for a border: this shall be your west border.

34:7 And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
point out for you mount Hor: 34:8 From mount Hor ye shall point out
your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the
border shall be to Zedad: 34:9 And the border shall go on to Ziphron,
and the goings out of it shall be at Hazarenan: this shall be your
north border.

34:10 And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to
Shepham: 34:11 And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on
the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward: 34:12 And the border
shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt
sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.

34:13 And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the LORD commanded to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 For the tribe of
the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
Manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 The two tribes and the
half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near
Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:17 These are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun.

34:18 And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb
the son of Jephunneh.

34:20 And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of
Ammihud.

34:21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.

34:22 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the
son of Jogli.

34:23 The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the
children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.

34:24 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel
the son of Shiphtan.

34:25 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun,
Elizaphan the son of Parnach.

34:26 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel
the son of Azzan.

34:27 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the
son of Shelomi.

34:28 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel
the son of Ammihud.

34:29 These are they whom the LORD commanded to divide the inheritance
unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.

35:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho, saying, 35:2 Command the children of Israel, that they
give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the
cities round about them.

35:3 And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of
them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
beasts.

35:4 And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the
Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand
cubits round about.

35:5 And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two
thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the
west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the
suburbs of the cities.

35:6 And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there
shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the
manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty
and two cities.

35:7 So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be
forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

35:8 And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of
the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many;
but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of
his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he
inheriteth.

35:9 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 35:10 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan
into the land of Canaan; 35:11 Then ye shall appoint you cities to be
cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which
killeth any person at unawares.

35:12 And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger;
that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in
judgment.

35:13 And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have
for refuge.

35:14 Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities
shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.

35:15 These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of
Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that
every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.

35:16 And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die,
he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

35:17 And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die,
and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:18 Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may
die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:19 The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he
meeteth him, he shall slay him.

35:20 But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of
wait, that he die; 35:21 Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he
die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a
murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he
meeteth him.

35:22 But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon
him any thing without laying of wait, 35:23 Or with any stone,
wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, that he
die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm: 35:24 Then the
congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood
according to these judgments: 35:25 And the congregation shall deliver
the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the
congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he
was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest,
which was anointed with the holy oil.

35:26 But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of
the city of his refuge, whither he was fled; 35:27 And the revenger of
blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the
revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:
35:28 Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until
the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest
the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.

35:29 So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

35:30 Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by
the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any
person to cause him to die.

35:31 Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to
death.

35:32 And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the
city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land,
until the death of the priest.

35:33 So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I
dwell: for I the LORD dwell among the children of Israel.

36:1 And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead,
the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of
Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the
chief fathers of the children of Israel: 36:2 And they said, The LORD
commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the
children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the
inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

36:3 And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of
the children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away
from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word
of the LORD, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.

36:6 This is the thing which the LORD doth command concerning the
daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall
keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

36:8 And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe
of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man
the inheritance of his fathers.

36:9 Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the daughters of
Zelophehad: 36:11 For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and
Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 And they were married into the families of the
sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 These are the commandments and the judgments, which the LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the
plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.




The Fifth Book of Moses:  Called Deuteronomy


1:1 These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side
Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea,
between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.

1:2 (There are eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of mount
Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 And it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses
spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the LORD
had given him in commandment unto them; 1:4 After he had slain Sihon
the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of
Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei: 1:5 On this side Jordan, in
the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying, 1:6 The
LORD our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great
river, the river Euphrates.

1:8 Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the LORD sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 The LORD your God hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (The LORD God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 How can
I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.

1:14 And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is
good for us to do.

1:15 So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over
hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and
officers among your tribes.

1:16 And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes
between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

1:17 Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and I will hear it.

1:18 And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should
do.

1:19 And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great
and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of
the Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us; and we came to
Kadeshbarnea.

1:20 And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the
Amorites, which the LORD our God doth give unto us.

1:21 Behold, the LORD thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and
possess it, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear
not, neither be discouraged.

1:22 And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send
men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us
word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall
come.

1:23 And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one
of a tribe: 1:24 And they turned and went up into the mountain, and
came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.

1:25 And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and
brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a
good land which the LORD our God doth give us.

1:26 Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the
commandment of the LORD your God: 1:27 And ye murmured in your tents,
and said, Because the LORD hated us, he hath brought us forth out of
the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to
destroy us.

1:28 Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart,
saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great
and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the
Anakims there.

1:29 Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.

1:30 The LORD your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you,
according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes; 1:31
And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the LORD thy God
bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went,
until ye came into this place.

1:32 Yet in this thing ye did not believe the LORD your God, 1:33 Who
went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your
tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and
in a cloud by day.

1:34 And the LORD heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 Surely there shall not one of these men of this
evil generation see that good land, which I sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children,
because he hath wholly followed the LORD.

1:37 Also the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also
shalt not go in thither.

1:38 But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall
go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.

1:39 Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they
shall possess it.

1:40 But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the Red sea.

1:41 Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the
LORD, we will go up and fight, according to all that the LORD our God
commanded us.

And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready
to go up into the hill.

1:42 And the LORD said unto me, Say unto them. Go not up, neither
fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

1:43 So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against
the commandment of the LORD, and went presumptuously up into the hill.

1:44 And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto
Hormah.

1:45 And ye returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD would not
hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

1:46 So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye
abode there.

2:1 Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the
way of the Red sea, as the LORD spake unto me: and we compassed mount
Seir many days.

2:2 And the LORD spake unto me, saying, 2:3 Ye have compassed this
mountain long enough: turn you northward.

2:4 And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the
coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and
they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves
therefore: 2:5 Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their
land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because I have given mount
Seir unto Esau for a possession.

2:6 Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

2:7 For the LORD thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy
hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these
forty years the LORD thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked
nothing.

2:8 And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau,
which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from
Eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.

2:9 And the LORD said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither
contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land
for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for
a possession.

2:10 The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many,
and tall, as the Anakims; 2:11 Which also were accounted giants, as
the Anakims; but the Moabites called them Emims.

2:12 The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of
Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them,
and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his
possession, which the LORD gave unto them.

2:13 Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered. And we
went over the brook Zered.

2:14 And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were
come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the
generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as
the LORD sware unto them.

2:15 For indeed the hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them
from among the host, until they were consumed.

2:16 So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and
dead from among the people, 2:17 That the LORD spake unto me, saying,
2:18 Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:
2:19 And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon,
distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of
the land of the children of Ammon any possession; because I have given
it unto the children of Lot for a possession.

2:20 (That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein
in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims; 2:21 A people
great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the LORD destroyed them
before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead: 2:22
As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he
destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and
dwelt in their stead even unto this day: 2:23 And the Avims which
dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth
out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)  2:24 Rise
ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I
have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his
land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.

2:25 This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of
thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear
report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.

2:26 And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto
Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying, 2:27 Let me pass
through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn
unto the right hand nor to the left.

2:28 Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me
water for money, that I may drink: only I will pass through on my
feet; 2:29 (As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the
Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over
Jordan into the land which the LORD our God giveth us.

2:30 But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the
LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that
he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.

2:31 And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and
his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
land.

2:32 Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight
at Jahaz.

2:33 And the LORD our God delivered him before us; and we smote him,
and his sons, and all his people.

2:34 And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed
the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left
none to remain: 2:35 Only the cattle we took for a prey unto
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

2:36 From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from
the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one
city too strong for us: the LORD our God delivered all unto us: 2:37
Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto
any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains,
nor unto whatsoever the LORD our God forbad us.

3:1 Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of
Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.

3:2 And the LORD said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him,
and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do
unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at
Heshbon.

3:3 So the LORD our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of
Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining.

3:4 And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city
which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of
Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

3:5 All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars;
beside unwalled towns a great many.

3:6 And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of
Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every
city.

3:7 But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a
prey to ourselves.

3:8 And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the
Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of
Arnon unto mount Hermon; 3:9 (Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion;
and the Amorites call it Shenir;) 3:10 All the cities of the plain,
and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the
kingdom of Og in Bashan.

3:11 For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants;
behold his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of
the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four
cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

3:12 And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which
is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof,
gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.

3:13 And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og,
gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with
all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.

3:14 Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the
coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name,
Bashanhavothjair, unto this day.

3:15 And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

3:16 And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead
even unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto
the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon; 3:17
The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth
even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah
eastward.

3:18 And I commanded you at that time, saying, The LORD your God hath
given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before
your brethren the children of Israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for I
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I
have given you; 3:20 Until the LORD have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall
ye return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.

3:21 And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen
all that the LORD your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall
the LORD do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

3:22 Ye shall not fear them: for the LORD your God he shall fight for
you.

3:23 And I besought the LORD at that time, saying, 3:24 O Lord GOD,
thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
according to thy works, and according to thy might?  3:25 I pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that
goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

3:26 But the LORD was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the LORD said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
me of this matter.

3:27 Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

3:28 But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
the land which thou shalt see.

3:29 So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.

4:1 Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the LORD God of your fathers giveth you.

4:2 Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall
ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the
LORD your God which I command you.

4:3 Your eyes have seen what the LORD did because of Baalpeor: for all
the men that followed Baalpeor, the LORD thy God hath destroyed them
from among you.

4:4 But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God are alive every one
of you this day.

4:5 Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the LORD
my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it.

4:6 Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.

4:7 For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them,
as the LORD our God is in all things that we call upon him for?  4:8
And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so
righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?  4:9 Only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons'
sons; 4:10 Specially the day that thou stoodest before the LORD thy
God in Horeb, when the LORD said unto me, Gather me the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that
they may teach their children.

4:11 And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain
burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and
thick darkness.

4:12 And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye
heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a
voice.

4:13 And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of
stone.

4:14 And the LORD commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and
judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to
possess it.

4:15 Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner
of similitude on the day that the LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of
the midst of the fire: 4:16 Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a
graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, 4:17 The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, 4:18 The likeness
of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 4:19 And lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and
the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven.

4:20 But the LORD hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the
iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day.

4:21 Furthermore the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, and sware
that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto
that good land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance:
4:22 But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye
shall go over, and possess that good land.

4:23 Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the
LORD your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or
the likeness of any thing, which the LORD thy God hath forbidden thee.

4:24 For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.

4:25 When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye
shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves,
and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do
evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke him to anger: 4:26 I
call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall
soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to
possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly
be destroyed.

4:27 And the LORD shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the LORD shall lead you.

4:28 And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

4:29 But if from thence thou shalt seek the LORD thy God, thou shalt
find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

4:30 When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the LORD thy God, and
shalt be obedient unto his voice; 4:31 (For the LORD thy God is a
merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.

4:32 For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,
since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such
thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?  4:33 Did
ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the
fire, as thou hast heard, and live?  4:34 Or hath God assayed to go
and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to
all that the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
4:35 Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the LORD he
is God; there is none else beside him.

4:36 Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might
instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou
heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.

4:37 And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power
out of Egypt; 4:38 To drive out nations from before thee greater and
mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is this day.

4:39 Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
LORD he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
none else.

4:40 Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,
which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon
the earth, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: 4:43 Namely, Bezer in
the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in
Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.

4:44 And this is the law which Moses set before the children of
Israel: 4:45 These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they
came forth out of Egypt.

4:46 On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Bethpeor, in the
land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses
and the children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of
Egypt: 4:47 And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of
Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 From Aroer, which is by the bank of the
river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is Hermon, 4:49 And all the
plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
under the springs of Pisgah.

5:1 And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel,
the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that
ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

5:2 The LORD our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.

5:3 The LORD made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us,
even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

5:4 The LORD talked with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire, 5:5 (I stood between the LORD and you at that time,
to shew you the word of the LORD: for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 5:6 I am the LORD thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage.

5:7 Thou shalt have none other gods before me.

5:8 Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 5:9 Thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, 5:10 And shewing
mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

5:11 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the
LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

5:12 Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee.

5:13 Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work: 5:14 But the
seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

5:15 And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and
that the LORD thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand
and by a stretched out arm: therefore the LORD thy God commanded thee
to keep the sabbath day.

5:16 Honour thy father and thy mother, as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go
well with thee, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

5:17 Thou shalt not kill.

5:18 Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

5:19 Neither shalt thou steal.

5:20 Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.

5:21 Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt
thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his
maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour's.

5:22 These words the LORD spake unto all your assembly in the mount
out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness,
with a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two
tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.

5:23 And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of
the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near
unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; 5:24 And
ye said, Behold, the LORD our God hath shewed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire:
we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.

5:25 Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
us: if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shall
die.

5:26 For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the
living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived?  5:27 Go thou near, and hear all that the LORD our God shall
say: and speak thou unto us all that the LORD our God shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

5:28 And the LORD heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto
me; and the LORD said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all
that they have spoken.

5:29 O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children for ever!  5:30 Go say to them, Get you into
your tents again.

5:31 But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto
thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give
them to possess it.

5:32 Ye shall observe to do therefore as the LORD your God hath
commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the
left.

5:33 Ye shall walk in all the ways which the LORD your God hath
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and
that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

6:1 Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
which the LORD your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them
in the land whither ye go to possess it: 6:2 That thou mightest fear
the LORD thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which
I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of
thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

6:3 Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be
well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the LORD God of
thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
honey.

6:4 Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one LORD: 6:5 And thou shalt
love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.

6:6 And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart: 6:7 And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 And it shall be, when the LORD thy God shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 And houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 Then beware lest thou forget the LORD, which brought
thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.

6:14 Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which
are round about you; 6:15 (For the LORD thy God is a jealous God among
you) lest the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

6:16 Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as ye tempted him in
Massah.

6:17 Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the LORD your God,
and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

6:18 And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
the LORD: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in
and possess the good land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers.

6:19 To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the LORD hath
spoken.

6:20 And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean
the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the LORD
our God hath commanded you?  6:21 Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We
were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and the LORD brought us out of Egypt
with a mighty hand: 6:22 And the LORD shewed signs and wonders, great
and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before
our eyes: 6:23 And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring
us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

6:24 And the LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the
LORD our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as
it is at this day.

6:25 And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments before the LORD our God, as he hath commanded us.

7:1 When the LORD thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the
Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites,
and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations
greater and mightier than thou; 7:2 And when the LORD thy God shall
deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy
them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
7:3 Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou
shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy
son.

7:4 For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the LORD be kindled against
you, and destroy thee suddenly.

7:5 But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars,
and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire.

7:6 For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy
God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all
people that are upon the face of the earth.

7:7 The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all
people: 7:8 But because the LORD loved you, and because he would keep
the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the LORD brought
you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

7:9 Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is God, the faithful God,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his
commandments to a thousand generations; 7:10 And repayeth them that
hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him
that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.

7:11 Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.

7:12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, that the LORD thy God shall keep
unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
7:13 And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn,
and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

7:14 Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male
or female barren among you, or among your cattle.

7:15 And the LORD will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

7:16 And thou shalt consume all the people which the LORD thy God
shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither
shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

7:17 If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I;
how can I dispossess them?  7:18 Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto
all Egypt; 7:19 The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the
signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out
arm, whereby the LORD thy God brought thee out: so shall the LORD thy
God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.

7:20 Moreover the LORD thy God will send the hornet among them, until
they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

7:21 Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the LORD thy God is
among you, a mighty God and terrible.

7:22 And the LORD thy God will put out those nations before thee by
little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the
beasts of the field increase upon thee.

7:23 But the LORD thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall
destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

7:24 And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to
stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

7:25 The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou
shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abomination to the LORD
thy God.

7:26 Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest
thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and
thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.

8:1 All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye
observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess
the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers.

8:2 And thou shalt remember all the way which the LORD thy God led
thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
commandments, or no.

8:3 And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that
he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the LORD doth man live.

8:4 Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell,
these forty years.

8:5 Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thee.

8:6 Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, to
walk in his ways, and to fear him.

8:7 For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys
and hills; 8:8 A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 8:9 A land wherein
thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing
in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig brass.

8:10 When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the LORD
thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

8:11 Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy God, in not keeping his
commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command
thee this day: 8:12 Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 8:13 And when thy herds and
thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou hast is multiplied; 8:14 Then thine heart be lifted up,
and thou forget the LORD thy God, which brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage; 8:15 Who led thee through
that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint; 8:16 Who fed thee in the
wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
latter end; 8:17 And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might
of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

8:18 But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant
which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

8:19 And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the LORD thy God, and
walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify
against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

8:20 As the nations which the LORD destroyeth before your face, so
shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of
the LORD your God.

9:1 Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to
possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and
fenced up to heaven, 9:2 A people great and tall, the children of the
Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can
stand before the children of Anak!  9:3 Understand therefore this day,
that the LORD thy God is he which goeth over before thee; as a
consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them
quickly, as the LORD hath said unto thee.

9:4 Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the LORD thy God hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the LORD
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the LORD doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the LORD sware unto thy fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

9:6 Understand therefore, that the LORD thy God giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the LORD thy God to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the LORD.

9:8 Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to wrath, so that the LORD was
angry with you to have destroyed you.

9:9 When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made with you, then I
abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat
bread nor drink water: 9:10 And the LORD delivered unto me two tables
of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written
according to all the words, which the LORD spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

9:11 And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights,
that the LORD gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant.

9:12 And the LORD said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from
hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have
corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way
which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

9:13 Furthermore the LORD spake unto me, saying, I have seen this
people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 9:14 Let me alone,
that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven:
and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

9:15 So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned
with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.

9:16 And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the LORD your
God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out
of the way which the LORD had commanded you.

9:17 And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
brake them before your eyes.

9:18 And I fell down before the LORD, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the LORD,
to provoke him to anger.

9:19 For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
LORD was wroth against you to destroy you. But the LORD hearkened unto
me at that time also.

9:20 And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and
I prayed for Aaron also the same time.

9:21 And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was
as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descended out of the mount.

9:22 And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye
provoked the LORD to wrath.

9:23 Likewise when the LORD sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up
and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against
the commandment of the LORD your God, and ye believed him not, nor
hearkened to his voice.

9:24 Ye have been rebellious against the LORD from the day that I knew
you.

9:25 Thus I fell down before the LORD forty days and forty nights, as
I fell down at the first; because the LORD had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 I prayed therefore unto the LORD, and said, O Lord GOD, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the
LORD was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 At that time the LORD said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone
like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee
an ark of wood.

10:2 And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first
tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

10:3 And I made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone
like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables
in mine hand.

10:4 And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the LORD spake unto you in the mount out of
the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the LORD gave
them unto me.

10:5 And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the LORD
commanded me.

10:6 And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the
children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

10:7 From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to
Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

10:8 At that time the LORD separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

10:9 Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren;
the LORD is his inheritance, according as the LORD thy God promised
him.

10:10 And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty
days and forty nights; and the LORD hearkened unto me at that time
also, and the LORD would not destroy thee.

10:11 And the LORD said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the
people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto
their fathers to give unto them.

10:12 And now, Israel, what doth the LORD thy God require of thee, but
to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him,
and to serve the LORD thy God with all thy heart and with all thy
soul, 10:13 To keep the commandments of the LORD, and his statutes,
which I command thee this day for thy good?  10:14 Behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heavens is the LORD's thy God, the earth also, with
all that therein is.

10:15 Only the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he
chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this
day.

10:16 Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiffnecked.

10:17 For the LORD your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great
God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
reward: 10:18 He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

10:19 Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt.

10:20 Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to
him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

10:21 He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee
these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.

10:22 Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten
persons; and now the LORD thy God hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

11:1 Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy God, and keep his charge,
and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.

11:2 And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which
have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the LORD
your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
11:3 And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of
Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land; 11:4 And
what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their
chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as
they pursued after you, and how the LORD hath destroyed them unto this
day; 11:5 And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came
into this place; 11:6 And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons
of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the
substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:
11:7 But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the LORD which he
did.

11:8 Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you
this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land,
whither ye go to possess it; 11:9 And that ye may prolong your days in
the land, which the LORD sware unto your fathers to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 But the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 A land which the LORD thy
God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which I command you this day, to love the LORD your
God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.

11:15 And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 11:17 And then the
LORD's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you.

11:18 Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes.

11:19 And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates: 11:21 That your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, in the land which the LORD sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I
command you, to do them, to love the LORD your God, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleave unto him; 11:23 Then will the LORD drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river
Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the LORD
your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; 11:27
A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I
command you this day: 11:28 And a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside out of the way which
I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD thy God hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount
Ebal.

11:30 Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?  11:31 For
ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD
your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which
I set before you this day.

12:1 These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to
do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to
possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under every green tree: 12:3 And ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

12:4 Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.

12:5 But unto the place which the LORD your God shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall
ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: 12:6 And thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings,
and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 12:7 And there ye
shall eat before the LORD your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that
ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy
God hath blessed thee.

12:8 Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

12:9 For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the LORD your God giveth you.

12:10 But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the LORD
your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 Then there
shall be a place which the LORD your God shall choose to cause his
name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the
LORD: 12:12 And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as
he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

12:13 Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
every place that thou seest: 12:14 But in the place which the LORD
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

12:15 Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
LORD thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
as water.

12:17 Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave offering of thine hand: 12:18 But thou must eat
them before the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and
thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou
shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto.

12:19 Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath
promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after.

12:21 If the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of
thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee, as I have commanded thee,
and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

12:22 Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat
them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

12:23 Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the
life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

12:24 Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the LORD.

12:26 Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the LORD shall choose: 12:27 And
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of the LORD thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall
be poured out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat
the flesh.

12:28 Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy
God.

12:29 When the LORD thy God shall cut off the nations from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in their land; 12:30 Take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did
these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

12:31 Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for every
abomination to the LORD, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods.

12:32 What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 And the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 13:3 Thou
shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the
LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 Ye shall walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God,
which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy
God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from
the midst of thee.

13:6 If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 13:7 Namely,
of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; 13:8 Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 But thou shalt surely kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.

13:10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

13:11 And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.

13:12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the LORD thy
God hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 Certain men, the
children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 Then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 13:15 Thou shalt
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edge of the sword.

13:16 And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
that the LORD may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
sworn unto thy fathers; 13:18 When thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee
this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God.

14:1 Ye are the children of the LORD your God: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

14:2 For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
nations that are upon the earth.

14:3 Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

14:4 These are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
the goat, 14:5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall
eat.

14:7 Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and
the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore
they are unclean unto you.

14:8 And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the
cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor
touch their dead carcase.

14:9 These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have
fins and scales shall ye eat: 14:10 And whatsoever hath not fins and
scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.

14:11 Of all clean birds ye shall eat.

14:12 But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
ossifrage, and the ospray, 14:13 And the glede, and the kite, and the
vulture after his kind, 14:14 And every raven after his kind, 14:15
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
his kind, 14:16 The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 14:17
And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 And the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shall not be eaten.

14:20 But of all clean fowls ye may eat.

14:21 Ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto
the LORD thy God.

Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

14:22 Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God, in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God always.

14:24 And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able
to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the LORD thy
God shall choose to set his name there, when the LORD thy God hath
blessed thee: 14:25 Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose: 14:26 And thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 And the Levite that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
14:29 And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

15:2 And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact
it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the
LORD's release.

15:3 Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 Save when there
shall be no poor among you; for the LORD shall greatly bless thee in
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to
possess it: 15:5 Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the
LORD thy God, to observe to do all these commandments which I command
thee this day.

15:6 For the LORD thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother: 15:8 But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

15:9 Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying,
The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the LORD against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the LORD thy
God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest
thine hand unto.

15:11 For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I
command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

15:12 And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that
wherewith the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee
this thing to day.

15:16 And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from
thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with
thee; 15:17 Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy
maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee,
in serving thee six years: and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in
all that thou doest.

15:19 All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work with
the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

15:20 Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy God year by year in the
place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy household.

15:21 And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD thy
God.

15:22 Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the LORD
thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth
out of Egypt by night.

16:2 Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the LORD thy
God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the LORD shall
choose to place his name there.

16:3 Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou
eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest
remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all
the days of thy life.

16:4 And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee: 16:6 But at the place which the
LORD thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.

16:7 And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be a solemn assembly to the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the
corn.

16:10 And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt
give unto the LORD thy God, according as the LORD thy God hath blessed
thee: 16:11 And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there.

16:12 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

16:13 Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: 16:14 And thou shalt
rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

16:15 Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the LORD thy God
in the place which the LORD shall choose: because the LORD thy God
shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine
hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

16:16 Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear before the LORD empty: 16:17 Every man shall
give as he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God
which he hath given thee.

16:18 Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.

16:19 Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.

16:20 That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

16:21 Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the LORD thy God
hateth.

17:1 Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

17:2 If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the
LORD thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the LORD thy God, in transgressing his covenant, 17:3
And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded; 17:4 And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in Israel: 17:5 Then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing,
unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that
is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death.

17:7 The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put
the evil away from among you.

17:8 If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the LORD thy God shall choose;
17:9 And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the
judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
thee the sentence of judgment: 17:10 And thou shalt do according to
the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose
shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 According to the sentence of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the LORD thy
God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from Israel.

17:13 And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
17:15 Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the LORD thy
God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over
thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother.

17:16 But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses:
forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the Levites: 17:19 And it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the LORD his God, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 That his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.

18:1 The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no
part nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the
LORD made by fire, and his inheritance.

18:2 Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren:
the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 And this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to
stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever.

18:6 And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel,
where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the
place which the LORD shall choose; 18:7 Then he shall minister in the
name of the LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which
stand there before the LORD.

18:8 They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of
the sale of his patrimony.

18:9 When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those
nations.

18:10 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 For all that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD:
and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out
from before thee.

18:13 Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy God.

18:14 For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the LORD thy
God hath not suffered thee so to do.

18:15 The LORD thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 According to all that thou desiredst of the LORD thy
God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again
the voice of the LORD my God, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that I die not.

18:17 And the LORD said unto me, They have well spoken that which they
have spoken.

18:18 I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him.

18:19 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto
my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

18:20 But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which
the LORD hath not spoken?  18:22 When a prophet speaketh in the name
of the LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 When the LORD thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the
LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
every slayer may flee thither.

19:4 And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hated not in time past; 19:5 As when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
those cities, and live: 19:6 Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the
slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

19:7 Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.

19:8 And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto
thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto
thy fathers; 19:9 If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do
them, which I command thee this day, to love the LORD thy God, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three: 19:10 That innocent blood be not shed in thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and
rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 Then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 Then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and
the judges, which shall be in those days; 19:18 And the judges shall
make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false
witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; 19:19 Then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

19:21 And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt.

20:2 And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 And shall say
unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them; 20:4 For the LORD your God is
he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.

20:5 And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is
there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him
go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
dedicate it.

20:6 And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet
eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in
the battle, and another man eat of it.

20:7 And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man take her.

20:8 And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they
shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him
go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well
as his heart.

20:9 And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking
unto the people that they shall make captains of the armies to lead
the people.

20:10 When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.

20:11 And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

20:12 And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: 20:13 And when the LORD thy
God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: 20:14 But the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

20:15 Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

20:16 But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth
give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that
breatheth: 20:17 But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the
Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee:
20:18 That they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
LORD your God.

20:19 When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by
forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 Only the trees which thou knowest that
they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.

21:1 If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and
they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the
slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer's neck there in the valley: 21:5 And the priests the sons of
Levi shall come near; for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the LORD; and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried: 21:6 And all
the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 21:7 And
they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

21:8 Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's
charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.

21:10 When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD
thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 21:12
Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 And she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

21:14 And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt
let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for
money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast
humbled her.

21:15 If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and
they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if
the firstborn son be hers that was hated: 21:16 Then it shall be, when
he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is
indeed the firstborn: 21:17 But he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he
hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
firstborn is his.

21:18 If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey
the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when
they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: 21:19 Then shall
his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the
elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 21:20 And they
shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to
be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 His body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him
that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be
not defiled, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and
hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto
thy brother.

22:2 And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it
to him again.

22:3 In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do
with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

22:6 If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thy days.

22:8 When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man
fall from thence.

22:9 Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit
of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be
defiled.

22:10 Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

22:11 Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and
linen together.

22:12 Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy
vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

22:13 If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 22:14
And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found
her not a maid: 22:15 Then shall the father of the damsel, and her
mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto
the elders of the city in the gate: 22:16 And the damsel's father
shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife,
and he hateth her; 22:17 And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech
against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these
are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.

22:18 And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise
him; 22:19 And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver,
and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he
may not put her away all his days.

22:20 But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not
found for the damsel: 22:21 Then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone
her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in
Israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.

22:22 If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.

22:23 If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a
man find her in the city, and lie with her; 22:24 Then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the
city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so
thou shalt put away evil from among you.

22:25 But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man
force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall
die.

22:26 But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the
damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his
neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter: 22:27 For he found
her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none
to save her.

22:28 If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 22:29 Then
the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty
shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled
her, he may not put her away all his days.

22:30 A man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his
father's skirt.

23:1 He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut
off, shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD.

23:2 A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even
to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of
the LORD.

23:3 An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the LORD; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the LORD for ever: 23:4 Because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and
because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.

23:5 Nevertheless the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but
the LORD thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because
the LORD thy God loved thee.

23:6 Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.

23:7 Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

23:8 The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the LORD in their third generation.

23:9 When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

23:10 If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of
uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
the camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 But it shall be,
when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee;
therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee: 23:16 He shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a
sodomite of the sons of Israel.

23:18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these
are abomination unto the LORD thy God.

23:19 Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money,
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 When thou shalt vow a vow unto the LORD thy God, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God will surely require it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the LORD
thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

23:24 When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thy vessel.

23:25 When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn.

24:1 When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some
uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and
give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

24:2 And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man's wife.

24:3 And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
24:4 Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at
home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

24:6 No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge:
for he taketh a man's life to pledge.

24:7 If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,
and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you:
as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

24:9 Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of Egypt.

24:10 When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.

24:11 Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

24:12 And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
24:13 In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God.

24:14 Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy
land within thy gates: 24:15 At his day thou shalt give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the LORD, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be
put to death for his own sin.

24:17 Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge: 24:18 But thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God
redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

24:19 When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.

24:21 When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not
glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless,
and for the widow.

24:22 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

25:1 If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the
righteous, and condemn the wicked.

25:2 And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

25:3 Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother
should seem vile unto thee.

25:4 Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

25:5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger:
her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

25:6 And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not
put out of Israel.

25:7 And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his
brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My
husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in
Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

25:8 Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him:
and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; 25:9 Then
shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders,
and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall
answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build
up his brother's house.

25:10 And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.

25:11 When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the
one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
pity her.

25:13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

25:16 For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomination unto the LORD thy God.

25:17 Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of Egypt; 25:18 How he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.

25:19 Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 That thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD
thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name there.

26:3 And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, I profess this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am
come unto the country which the LORD sware unto our fathers for to
give us.

26:4 And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.

26:5 And thou shalt speak and say before the LORD thy God, A Syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 And when we cried unto the
LORD God of our fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and looked on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 And the LORD
brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 And he hath brought us into this place, and hath
given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land,
which thou, O LORD, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the
LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy God: 26:11 And thou
shalt rejoice in every good thing which the LORD thy God hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the
stranger that is among you.

26:12 When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thy gates, and be filled; 26:13 Then thou shalt
say before the LORD thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all
thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed
thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them.

26:14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

26:15 Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

26:17 Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 And the LORD hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 And to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
LORD thy God, as he hath spoken.

27:1 And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying,
Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.

27:2 And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 And thou shalt
write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the LORD God of thy
fathers hath promised thee.

27:4 Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall
set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and
thou shalt plaister them with plaister.

27:5 And there shalt thou build an altar unto the LORD thy God, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

27:6 Thou shalt build the altar of the LORD thy God of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the LORD thy God:
27:7 And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoice before the LORD thy God.

27:8 And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.

27:9 And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel,
saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the
people of the LORD thy God.

27:10 Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.

27:11 And Moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 These
shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph,
and Benjamin: 27:13 And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse;
Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

27:14 And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel
with a loud voice, 27:15 Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or
molten image, an abomination unto the LORD, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. And all the people
shall answer and say, Amen.

27:16 Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:17 Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:18 Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:19 Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.

27:20 Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife; because he
uncovereth his father's skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.

27:21 Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:22 Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his
father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say,
Amen.

27:23 Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:24 Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:25 Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:26 Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them. And all the people shall say, Amen.

28:1 And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto
the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to do all his
commandments which I command thee this day, that the LORD thy God will
set thee on high above all nations of the earth: 28:2 And all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken
unto the voice of the LORD thy God.

28:3 Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in
the field.

28:4 Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep.

28:5 Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:6 Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:7 The LORD shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to
be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way,
and flee before thee seven ways.

28:8 The LORD shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses,
and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee
in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

28:9 The LORD shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD
thy God, and walk in his ways.

28:10 And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of the LORD; and they shall be afraid of thee.

28:11 And the LORD shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of
thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy
ground, in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

28:12 The LORD shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt
not borrow.

28:13 And the LORD shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
hearken unto the commandments of the LORD thy God, which I command
thee this day, to observe and to do them: 28:14 And thou shalt not go
aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the
right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.

28:15 But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and
his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: 28:16 Cursed shalt thou be in
the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.

28:17 Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:18 Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

28:19 Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:20 The LORD shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in
all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be
destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

28:21 The LORD shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he
have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess
it.

28:22 The LORD shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever,
and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the
sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee
until thou perish.

28:23 And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the
earth that is under thee shall be iron.

28:24 The LORD shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

28:25 The LORD shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies:
thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before
them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

28:26 And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and
unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

28:27 The LORD will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the
emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not
be healed.

28:28 The LORD shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of heart: 28:29 And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and
thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save thee.

28:30 Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her:
thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou
shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.

28:31 Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not
eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy
face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto
thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

28:32 Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people,
and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day
long; and there shall be no might in thine hand.

28:33 The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which
thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed
alway: 28:34 So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

28:35 The LORD shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the
top of thy head.

28:36 The LORD shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set
over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

28:37 And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
among all nations whither the LORD shall lead thee.

28:38 Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather
but little in; for the locust shall consume it.

28:39 Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither
drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat
them.

28:40 Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou
shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his
fruit.

28:41 Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy
them; for they shall go into captivity.

28:42 All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

28:43 The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high; and thou shalt come down very low.

28:44 He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall
be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

28:45 Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou
hearkenedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee: 28:46 And they
shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever.

28:47 Because thou servedst not the LORD thy God with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; 28:48
Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the LORD shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he
have destroyed thee.

28:49 The LORD shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue
thou shalt not understand; 28:50 A nation of fierce countenance, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:
28:51 And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either
corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy
sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

28:52 And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy
land, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

28:53 And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters, which the LORD thy God hath given thee, in
the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee: 28:54 So that the man that is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward
the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he
shall leave: 28:55 So that he will not give to any of them of the
flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left
him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee in all thy gates.

28:56 The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness
and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom,
and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 28:57 And toward her
young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her
children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all
things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shall distress thee in thy gates.

28:58 If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that
are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and
fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD; 28:59 Then the LORD will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues,
and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

28:60 Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt,
which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.

28:61 Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in
the book of this law, them will the LORD bring upon thee, until thou
be destroyed.

28:62 And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of
the LORD thy God.

28:63 And it shall come to pass, that as the LORD rejoiced over you to
do you good, and to multiply you; so the LORD will rejoice over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from
off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

28:64 And the LORD shall scatter thee among all people, from the one
end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other
gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and
stone.

28:65 And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall
the sole of thy foot have rest: but the LORD shall give thee there a
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind: 28:66 And
thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and
night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life: 28:67 In the morning
thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

28:68 And the LORD shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by
the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 These are the words of the covenant, which the LORD commanded
Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside
the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

29:2 And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have
seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto
Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; 29:3 The
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 Yet the LORD hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

29:5 And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes
are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy
foot.

29:6 Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink: that ye might know that I am the LORD your God.

29:7 And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and
Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote
them: 29:8 And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto
the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.

29:9 Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.

29:10 Ye stand this day all of you before the LORD your God; your
captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the
men of Israel, 29:11 Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the LORD thy
God, and into his oath, which the LORD thy God maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 That he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and
to Jacob.

29:14 Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 But with him that standeth here with us this day before the LORD
our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 And ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 Lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the LORD
our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should
be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood; 29:19 And it come
to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: 29:20 The
LORD will not spare him, but then the anger of the LORD and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall blot out
his name from under heaven.

29:21 And the LORD shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes
of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are
written in this book of the law: 29:22 So that the generation to come
of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that
shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of
that land, and the sicknesses which the LORD hath laid upon it; 29:23
And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the
LORD overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: 29:24 Even all nations
shall say, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what
meaneth the heat of this great anger?  29:25 Then men shall say,
Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the
land of Egypt: 29:26 For they went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them: 29:27 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this
land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
29:28 And the LORD rooted them out of their land in anger, and in
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as
it is this day.

29:29 The secret things belong unto the LORD our God: but those things
which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that
we may do all the words of this law.

30:1 And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon
thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and
thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the LORD
thy God hath driven thee, 30:2 And shalt return unto the LORD thy God,
and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this
day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul; 30:3 That then the LORD thy God will turn thy captivity, and
have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all
the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath scattered thee.

30:4 If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven,
from thence will the LORD thy God gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee: 30:5 And the LORD thy God will bring thee into the land
which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

30:6 And the LORD thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

30:7 And the LORD thy God will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

30:8 And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the LORD, and do all
his commandments which I command thee this day.

30:9 And the LORD thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle,
and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the LORD will again
rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: 30:10 If
thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the
law, and if thou turn unto the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul.

30:11 For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off.

30:12 It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
it?  30:13 Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it?  30:14 But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

30:15 See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death
and evil; 30:16 In that I command thee this day to love the LORD thy
God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
the LORD thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

30:17 But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but
shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; 30:18 I
denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye
shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over
Jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 That thou
mayest love the LORD thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the LORD sware
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

31:1 And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.

31:2 And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; I can no more go out and come in: also the LORD hath said unto
me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

31:3 The LORD thy God, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the LORD hath said.

31:4 And the LORD shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og,
kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 And the LORD shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded
you.

31:6 Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

31:7 And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 And the LORD, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed.

31:9 And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and unto
all the elders of Israel.

31:10 And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 When all Israel is come to appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all Israel in their hearing.

31:12 Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 And that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

31:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and
Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 And the LORD appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.

31:17 Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I
will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall
be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because
our God is not among us?  31:18 And I will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods.

31:19 Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the
children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a
witness for me against the children of Israel.

31:20 For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have
brought them into the land which I sware.

31:22 Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of Israel.

31:23 And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel
into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.

31:24 And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 That
Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
LORD, saying, 31:26 Take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there
for a witness against thee.

31:27 For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the LORD;
and how much more after my death?  31:28 Gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil
in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel
the words of this song, until they were ended.

32:1 Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the
words of my mouth.

32:2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 Because I will publish the name of the LORD: ascribe
ye greatness unto our God.

32:4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

32:5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.

32:6 Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee?  32:7 Remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

32:8 When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel.

32:9 For the LORD's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye.

32:11 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him.

32:13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 32:14 Butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape.

32:15 But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.

32:16 They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger.

32:17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew
not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

32:18 Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten God that formed thee.

32:19 And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.

32:20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children
in whom is no faith.

32:21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to
anger with a foolish nation.

32:22 For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains.

32:23 I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon
them.

32:24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat,
and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon
them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.

32:25 The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray
hairs.

32:26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men: 32:27 Were it not that I
feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the LORD hath not done all this.

32:28 For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
understanding in them.

32:29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!  32:30 How should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the LORD had shut them up?  32:31 For their rock is not
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.

32:32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
32:33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of
asps.

32:34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures?  32:35 To me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them make haste.

32:36 For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left.

32:37 And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
be your protection.

32:39 See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I
kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand.

32:40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

32:41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

32:42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

32:43 Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the
blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries,
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.

32:44 And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears
of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.

32:45 And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
32:46 And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which
I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law.

32:47 For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
go over Jordan to possess it.

32:48 And the LORD spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in
the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:
32:50 And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 Because ye trespassed against me among the
children of Israel at the waters of MeribahKadesh, in the wilderness
of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
Israel.

32:52 Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.

33:1 And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed
the children of Israel before his death.

33:2 And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob.

33:5 And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of Israel were gathered together.

33:6 Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.

33:7 And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, LORD, the
voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be
sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.

33:8 And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy
holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst
strive at the waters of Meribah; 33:9 Who said unto his father and to
his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept thy covenant.

33:10 They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar.

33:11 Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in
safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders.

33:13 And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the
precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,
and for the precious things put forth by the moon, 33:15 And for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of
the lasting hills, 33:16 And for the precious things of the earth and
fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren.

33:17 His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of
Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.

33:18 And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and,
Issachar, in thy tents.

33:19 They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall
offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.

33:20 And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he
dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

33:21 And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a
portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of
the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments
with Israel.

33:22 And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from
Bashan.

33:23 And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and
full with the blessing of the LORD: possess thou the west and the
south.

33:24 And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

33:25 Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

33:27 The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, Destroy them.

33:28 Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved
by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of
Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD
shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan, 34:2 And all Naphtali,
and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 And the south, and the plain of the valley of
Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.

34:4 And the LORD said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the LORD.

34:6 And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against
Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

34:9 And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD commanded Moses.

34:10 And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,
whom the LORD knew face to face, 34:11 In all the signs and the
wonders, which the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt to
Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 And in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed
in the sight of all Israel.




The Book of Joshua


1:1 Now after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD it came to
pass, that the LORD spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give
to them, even to the children of Israel.

1:3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.

1:4 From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river,
the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1:5 There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

1:6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers
to give them.

1:7 Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest.

1:8 This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe
of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying, 1:13 Remember the word which Moses
the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land.

1:14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your
God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD's servant gave you on
this side Jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the LORD thy God be with thee, as he was with
Moses.

1:18 Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and
came into an harlot's house, named Rahab, and lodged there.

2:2 And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came
men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the
country.

2:3 And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the
men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for
they be come to search out all the country.

2:4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There
came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were: 2:5 And it came to
pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that
the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them
quickly; for ye shall overtake them.

2:6 But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.

2:7 And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords:
and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut
the gate.

2:8 And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the
roof; 2:9 And she said unto the men, I know that the LORD hath given
you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you.

2:10 For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red sea
for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og,
whom ye utterly destroyed.

2:11 And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
for the LORD your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth
beneath.

2:12 Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I
have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my
father's house, and give me a true token: 2:13 And that ye will save
alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.

2:14 And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not
this our business. And it shall be, when the LORD hath given us the
land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.

2:15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her
house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.

2:16 And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the
pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the
pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.

2:17 And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine
oath which thou hast made us swear.

2:18 Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of
scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
father's household, home unto thee.

2:19 And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy
house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will
be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood
shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.

2:20 And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.

2:21 And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window.

2:22 And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

2:23 So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and
passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all
things that befell them: 2:24 And they said unto Joshua, Truly the
LORD hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.

3:1 And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.

3:2 And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 And they commanded the people, saying, When ye
see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the
Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.

3:6 And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was
with Moses, so I will be with thee.

3:8 And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of
Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.

3:9 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear
the words of the LORD your God.

3:10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and
the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.

3:11 Behold, the ark of the covenant of the LORD of all the earth
passeth over before you into Jordan.

3:12 Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel,
out of every tribe a man.

3:13 And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of
the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the LORD of all the earth,
shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be
cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall
stand upon an heap.

3:14 And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to
pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant
before the people; 3:15 And as they that bare the ark were come unto
Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in
the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest,) 3:16 That the waters which came down from above
stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is
beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed
over right against Jericho.

3:17 And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the
Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed
clean over Jordan.

4:1 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
Jordan, that the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:2 Take you twelve
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 And command ye
them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the
place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night.

4:4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of Israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 And Joshua said unto
them, Pass over before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of
Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel: 4:6
That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones?  4:7
Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it passed over
Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.

4:8 And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the LORD spake unto
Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day.

4:10 For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan,
until everything was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over.

4:11 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the LORD passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the
tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as
Moses spake unto them: 4:13 About forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the LORD unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.

4:14 On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel;
and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.

4:15 And the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:16 Command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan.

4:17 Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of
Jordan.

4:18 And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the LORD were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the
soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
banks, as they did before.

4:19 And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.

4:20 And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did
Joshua pitch in Gilgal.

4:21 And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean
these stones?  4:22 Then ye shall let your children know, saying,
Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.

4:23 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the LORD, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the LORD your God for ever.

5:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which
were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the
Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up
the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were
passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them
any more, because of the children of Israel.

5:2 At that time the LORD said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives,
and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.

5:3 And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
Israel at the hill of the foreskins.

5:4 And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people
that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.

5:5 Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the
people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth
out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.

5:6 For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt,
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto
whom the LORD sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
LORD sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

5:7 And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
circumcised them by the way.

5:8 And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the
people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were
whole.

5:9 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is
called Gilgal unto this day.

5:10 And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of
Jericho.

5:11 And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.

5:12 And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.

5:13 And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?  5:14 And he
said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And
Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, What saith my Lord unto his servant?  5:15 And the captain of the
LORD's host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.

6:1 Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
Israel: none went out, and none came in.

6:2 And the LORD said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand
Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.

6:3 And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.

6:4 And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven
times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

6:5 And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall
fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight
before him.

6:6 And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them,
Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD.

6:7 And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the LORD.

6:8 And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that
the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
before the LORD, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
covenant of the LORD followed them.

6:9 And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
and blowing with the trumpets.

6:10 And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout,
nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

6:11 So the ark of the LORD compassed the city, going about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.

6:12 And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the LORD.

6:13 And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before
the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the
ark of the LORD, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

6:14 And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days.

6:15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same
manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven
times.

6:16 And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew
with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the LORD
hath given you the city.

6:17 And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we
sent.

6:18 And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest
ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.

6:19 But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
consecrated unto the LORD: they shall come into the treasury of the
LORD.

6:20 So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city.

6:21 And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword.

6:22 But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

6:23 And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of Israel.

6:24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasury of the house of the LORD.

6:25 And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto
this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out
Jericho.

6:26 And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man
before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it.

6:27 So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout
all the country.

7:1 But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the
anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel.

7:2 And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven,
on the east of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the
country.

And the men went up and viewed Ai.

7:3 And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the
people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
few.

7:4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men:
and they fled before the men of Ai.

7:5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
as water.

7:6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the LORD until the eventide, he and the elders of
Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 And Joshua said, Alas, O LORD God, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side Jordan!  7:8 O LORD, what shall I say, when Israel
turneth their backs before their enemies!  7:9 For the Canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name?  7:10 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get thee up;
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?  7:11 Israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you.

7:13 Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to
morrow: for thus saith the LORD God of Israel, There is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

7:14 In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the LORD
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the LORD
shall take shall come man by man.

7:15 And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought
folly in Israel.

7:16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken: 7:17 And he brought
the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he
brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
7:18 And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of
Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was
taken.

7:19 And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to
the LORD God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against
the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done: 7:21 When I saw
among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

7:22 So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

7:23 And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out
before the LORD.

7:24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
Achor.

7:25 And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall
trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.

7:26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So
the LORD turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name
of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.

8:1 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I
have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city,
and his land: 8:2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst
unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it.

8:3 So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai:
and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent
them away by night.

8:4 And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 And I, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them.

8:7 Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand.

8:8 And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the LORD shall ye
do. See, I have commanded you.

8:9 Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua
lodged that night among the people.

8:10 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.

8:11 And all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the
north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.

8:12 And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.

8:13 And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on
the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the
city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

8:14 And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to
battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city.

8:15 And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

8:16 And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue
after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from
the city.

8:17 And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out
after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.

8:18 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua
stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.

8:19 And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.

8:20 And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
turned back upon the pursuers.

8:21 And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
and slew the men of Ai.

8:22 And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were
in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

8:23 And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.

8:24 And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all
the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they
chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai,
and smote it with the edge of the sword.

8:25 And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.

8:26 For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.

8:27 Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey
unto themselves, according unto the word of the LORD which he
commanded Joshua.

8:28 And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD God of Israel in mount
Ebal, 8:31 As Moses the servant of the LORD commanded the children of
Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace
offerings.

8:32 And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.

8:33 And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the
Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the
servant of the LORD had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of Israel.

8:34 And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua
read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.

9:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side
Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the
great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the
Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and
with Israel, with one accord.

9:3 And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
Jericho and to Ai, 9:4 They did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 And old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy.

9:6 And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us.

9:7 And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you?  9:8 And they said
unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are
ye? and from whence come ye?  9:9 And they said unto him, From a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy
God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
9:10 And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were
beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan,
which was at Ashtaroth.

9:11 Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake
to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.

9:12 This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes
are become old by reason of the very long journey.

9:14 And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the LORD.

9:15 And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to
let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.

9:16 And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and
Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.

9:18 And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of
the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel. And
all the congregation murmured against the princes.

9:19 But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn
unto them by the LORD God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch
them.

9:20 This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes had promised them.

9:22 And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us?  9:23 Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my God.

9:24 And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the LORD thy God commanded his servant Moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of Israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose.

10:1 Now it came to pass, when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had heard
how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done
to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how
the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among
them; 10:2 That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city,
as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and
all the men thereof were mighty.

10:3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of
Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of
Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying, 10:4 Come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with
Joshua and with the children of Israel.

10:5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem,
the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king
of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.

10:6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal,
saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell
in the mountains are gathered together against us.

10:7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war
with him, and all the mighty men of valour.

10:8 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have
delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
before thee.

10:9 Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal
all night.

10:10 And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth
up to Bethhoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.

10:11 And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were
in the going down to Bethhoron, that the LORD cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which
died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with
the sword.

10:12 Then spake Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered
up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the
sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in
the valley of Ajalon.

10:13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day.

10:14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the
LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the LORD fought for
Israel.

10:15 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal.

10:16 But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
Makkedah.

10:17 And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in
a cave at Makkedah.

10:18 And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 And stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them
into your hand.

10:20 And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities.

10:21 And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.

10:22 Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave.

10:23 And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out
of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.

10:24 And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto
the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put
your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put
their feet upon the necks of them.

10:25 And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight.

10:26 And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them
on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.

10:27 And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun,
that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in
the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.

10:28 And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all
the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.

10:29 Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto
Libnah, and fought against Libnah: 10:30 And the LORD delivered it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
the king of Jericho.

10:31 And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:32 And the
LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.

10:33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua
smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:34 And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with
him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:35 And
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day,
according to all that he had done to Lachish.

10:36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto
Hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 And they took it, and smote
it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.

10:38 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.

10:40 So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of
Israel commanded.

10:41 And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all
the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.

10:42 And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time,
because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel.

10:43 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal.

11:1 And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of
Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, 11:2 And to the kings that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west, 11:3 And to
the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to
the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.

11:4 And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
horses and chariots very many.

11:5 And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.

11:6 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for
to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before
Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with
fire.

11:7 So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

11:8 And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote
them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining.

11:9 And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their
horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

11:10 And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms.

11:11 And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt Hazor with fire.

11:12 And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.

11:13 But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel
burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.

11:14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe.

11:15 As the LORD commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command
Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD
commanded Moses.

11:16 So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 Even
from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the
valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them.

11:18 Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

11:19 There was not a city that made peace with the children of
Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should
come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
LORD commanded Moses.

11:21 And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the
mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the
mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities.

11:22 There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children
of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.

11:23 So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD
said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel
according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from
war.

12:1 Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel
smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the
rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the
plain on the east: 12:2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river
Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even
unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;
12:3 And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah: 12:4 And the
coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 12:5 And reigned in mount
Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the
Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon
king of Heshbon.

12:6 Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel
smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto
the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.

12:7 And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the
children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad
in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to
Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 12:8 In the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: 12:9 The
king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
12:10 The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 12:11 The
king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 12:12 The king of
Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 12:13 The king of Debir, one; the
king of Geder, one; 12:14 The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad,
one; 12:15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 12:16
The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 12:17 The king of
Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 12:18 The king of Aphek, one;
the king of Lasharon, one; 12:19 The king of Madon, one; the king of
Hazor, one; 12:20 The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph,
one; 12:21 The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 12:22
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one; 12:23 The
king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of
Gilgal, one; 12:24 The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and
one.

13:1 Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto
him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed.

13:2 This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
Philistines, and all Geshuri, 13:3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt,
even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the
Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the
Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also
the Avites: 13:4 From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and
Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the
Amorites: 13:5 And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward
the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into
Hamath.

13:6 All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from
before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.

13:7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh, 13:8 With whom the Reubenites
and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave
them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD
gave them; 13:9 From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon,
and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
Medeba unto Dibon; 13:10 And all the cities of Sihon king of the
Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of
Ammon; 13:11 And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and
Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah; 13:12
All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in
Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites,
nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell
among the Israelites until this day.

13:14 Only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben
inheritance according to their families.

13:16 And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river
Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by Medeba; 13:17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon, 13:18 And Jahaza, and
Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 13:19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and
Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 And Bethpeor, and
Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth, 13:21 And all the cities of the
plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which
reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi,
and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon,
dwelling in the country.

13:22 Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

13:23 And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the
border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben
after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.

13:24 And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the
children of Gad according to their families.

13:25 And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and
half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before
Rabbah; 13:26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and
from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir; 13:27 And in the valley,
Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.

13:28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages.

13:29 And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and
this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh
by their families.

13:30 And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom
of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei,
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families.

13:32 These are the countries which Moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by
Jericho, eastward.

13:33 But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the
LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 And these are the countries which the children of Israel
inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand
of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the
thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and
thee in Kadeshbarnea.

14:7 Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me
from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but I wholly followed the LORD my God.

14:9 And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for
ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God.

14:10 And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses,
while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
I am this day fourscore and five years old.

14:11 As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD will be
with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the LORD said.

14:13 And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh
Hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the LORD God of Israel.

14:15 And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a
great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.

15:1 This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by
their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin
southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.

15:2 And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from
the bay that looketh southward: 15:3 And it went out to the south side
to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the
south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up
to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa: 15:4 From thence it passed
toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out
of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.

15:5 And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of
Jordan.

And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at
the uttermost part of Jordan: 15:6 And the border went up to
Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border
went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben: 15:7 And the border
went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward,
looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which
is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the
waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel: 15:8
And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the
south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went
up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
15:9 And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount
Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:
15:10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir,
and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on
the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
15:11 And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and
the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and
went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the
sea.

15:12 And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.

This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to
their families.

15:13 And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua,
even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.

15:14 And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.

15:15 And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name
of Debir before was Kirjathsepher.

15:16 And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

15:17 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and
he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

15:18 And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said
unto her, What wouldest thou?  15:19 Who answered, Give me a blessing;
for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water.
And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.

15:20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah
according to their families.

15:21 And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
15:22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah, 15:23 And Kedesh, and Hazor,
and Ithnan, 15:24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, 15:25 And Hazor,
Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor, 15:26 Amam, and
Shema, and Moladah, 15:27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
15:28 And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah, 15:29 Baalah, and
Iim, and Azem, 15:30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah, 15:31 And
Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah, 15:32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim,
and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
15:34 And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, and Enam, 15:35 Jarmuth, and
Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah, 15:36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and
Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages: 15:37
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad, 15:38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and
Joktheel, 15:39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon, 15:40 And Cabbon, and
Lahmam, and Kithlish, 15:41 And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and
Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages: 15:42 Libnah, and Ether,
and Ashan, 15:43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib, 15:44 And Keilah,
and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages: 15:45
Ekron, with her towns and her villages: 15:46 From Ekron even unto the
sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages: 15:47 Ashdod with
her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto
the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 15:48
And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh, 15:49 And Dannah,
and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir, 15:50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and
Anim, 15:51 And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their
villages: 15:52 Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean, 15:53 And Janum, and
Bethtappuah, and Aphekah, 15:54 And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is
Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages: 15:55 Maon, Carmel,
and Ziph, and Juttah, 15:56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
15:57 Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages: 15:58
Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor, 15:59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and
Eltekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 In
the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah, 15:62 And Nibshan,
and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.

15:63 As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children
of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwell with the
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.

16:1 And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by
Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that
goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel, 16:2 And goeth out from
Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
16:3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast
of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are
at the sea.

16:4 So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their
inheritance.

16:5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their
families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east
side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper; 16:6 And the border
went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the
border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the
east to Janohah; 16:7 And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to
Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.

16:8 The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah;
and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.

16:9 And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their
villages.

16:10 And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but
the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve
under tribute.

17:1 There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the
firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the
father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead
and Bashan.

17:2 There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by
their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of
Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of
Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of
Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by
their families.

17:3 But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of
Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and
Tirzah.

17:4 And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua
the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD commanded
Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore
according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of
Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan; 17:6 Because
the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead.

17:7 And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that
lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto
the inhabitants of Entappuah.

17:8 Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border
of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim; 17:9 And the coast
descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities
of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh
also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were
at the sea: 17:10 Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was
Manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher
on the north, and in Issachar on the east.

17:11 And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her
towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

17:13 Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen
strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out.

17:14 And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a
great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me hitherto?  17:15
And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us:
and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of Jezreel.

17:17 And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and
to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 But the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled
together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. And the land was subdued before them.

18:2 And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance.

18:3 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 Give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before
the LORD our God.

18:7 But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east,
which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.

18:8 And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you
before the LORD in Shiloh.

18:9 And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the
host at Shiloh.

18:10 And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and
there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to
their divisions.

18:11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up
according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.

18:12 And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the
border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
wilderness of Bethaven.

18:13 And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of
Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to
Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
Bethhoron.

18:14 And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the
sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward;
and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west
quarter.

18:15 And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the
border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of
Nephtoah: 18:16 And the border came down to the end of the mountain
that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the
valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of
Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
18:17 And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and
went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of
Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 18:18
And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and
went down unto Arabah: 18:19 And the border passed along to the side
of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the
north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the
south coast.

18:20 And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the
inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round
about, according to their families.

18:21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin
according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the
valley of Keziz, 18:22 And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel, 18:23
And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah, 18:24 And Chepharhaammonai, and
Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages: 18:25 Gibeon, and
Ramah, and Beeroth, 18:26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah, 18:27
And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah, 18:28 And Zelah, Eleph, and
Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin
according to their families.

19:1 And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of
the children of Simeon according to their families: and their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.

19:2 And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, and Sheba, and
Moladah, 19:3 And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem, 19:4 And Eltolad,
and Bethul, and Hormah, 19:5 And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and
Hazarsusah, 19:6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and
their villages: 19:7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities
and their villages: 19:8 And all the villages that were round about
these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their
families.

19:9 Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance
of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was
too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their
inheritance within the inheritance of them.

19:10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according
to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
19:11 And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and
reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam; 19:12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising
unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and
goeth up to Japhia, 19:13 And from thence passeth on along on the east
to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to
Neah; 19:14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to
Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
19:15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and
Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.

19:16 This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to
their families, these cities with their villages.

19:17 And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of
Issachar according to their families.

19:18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
19:19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath, 19:20 And Rabbith, and
Kishion, and Abez, 19:21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and
Bethpazzez; 19:22 And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and
Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen
cities with their villages.

19:23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Asher according to their families.

19:25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
19:26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel
westward, and to Shihorlibnath; 19:27 And turneth toward the sunrising
to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel
toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul
on the left hand, 19:28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah,
even unto great Zidon; 19:29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and
to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the
outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib: 19:30 Ummah
also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.

19:31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the
children of Naphtali according to their families.

19:33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and
Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were
at Jordan: 19:34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor,
and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the
south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon
Jordan toward the sunrising.

19:35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and
Chinnereth, 19:36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor, 19:37 And Kedesh,
and Edrei, and Enhazor, 19:38 And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and
Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.

19:39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:40 And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Dan according to their families.

19:41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and
Irshemesh, 19:42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah, 19:43 And
Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron, 19:44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and
Baalath, 19:45 And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon, 19:46 And
Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.

19:47 And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for
them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan
their father.

19:48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:49 When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua
the son of Nun among them: 19:50 According to the word of the LORD
they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount
Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

19:51 These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before
the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they
made an end of dividing the country.

20:1 The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying, 20:2 Speak to the
children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses: 20:3 That the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

20:4 And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the
city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

20:5 And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not
deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour
unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.

20:6 And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto
his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he
fled.

20:7 And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and
Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the
mountain of Judah.

20:8 And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned
Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and
Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of
the tribe of Manasseh.

20:9 These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.

21:1 Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel; 21:2 And they
spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the
children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of
the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out
of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.

21:6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
cities.

21:7 The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun,
twelve cities.

21:8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.

21:9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

21:10 Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the
Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot.

21:11 And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which
city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it.

21:12 But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they
to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.

21:13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with
her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
21:16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.

21:17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:19 All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were
thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:20 And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which
remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their
lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.

21:21 For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to
be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities.

21:23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon
with her suburbs, 21:24 Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathrimmon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:25 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs,
and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.

21:26 All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of
the children of Kohath that remained.

21:27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the
Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in
Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.

21:28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs,
Dabareh with her suburbs, 21:29 Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim
with her suburbs; four cities.

21:30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon
with her suburbs, 21:31 Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with
her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.

21:33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:34 And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the
Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and
Kartah with her suburbs, 21:35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with
her suburbs; four cities.

21:36 And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and
Jahazah with her suburbs, 21:37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, and
Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.

21:38 And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs,
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
21:39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in
all.

21:40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families,
which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot
twelve cities.

21:41 All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the
children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.

21:42 These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them:
thus were all these cities.

21:43 And the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

21:44 And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their
hand.

21:45 There failed not ought of any good thing which the LORD had
spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.

22:1 Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, 22:2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all that
Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that I commanded you: 22:3 Ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the LORD your God.

22:4 And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant
of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan.

22:5 But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given
possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua
among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 And
he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.

22:9 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel
out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country
of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

22:10 And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the
land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar
to see to.

22:11 And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of
Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of
Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.

22:12 And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole
congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at
Shiloh, to go up to war against them.

22:13 And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and
to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the
land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, 22:14 And with
him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the
tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their
fathers among the thousands of Israel.

22:15 And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children
of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 Thus saith the whole
congregation of the LORD, What trespass is this that ye have committed
against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the
LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the LORD?  22:17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was
a plague in the congregation of the LORD, 22:18 But that ye must turn
away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whole congregation of Israel.

22:19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the LORD, wherein the
LORD's tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the LORD our God.

22:20 Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity.

22:21 Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands
of Israel, 22:22 The LORD God of gods, the LORD God of gods, he
knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the LORD, (save us not this day,) 22:23 That we
have built us an altar to turn from following the LORD, or if to offer
thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace
offerings thereon, let the LORD himself require it; 22:24 And if we
have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to
come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye
to do with the LORD God of Israel?  22:25 For the LORD hath made
Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children
of Gad; ye have no part in the LORD: so shall your children make our
children cease from fearing the LORD.

22:26 Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 But that it may be a
witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the LORD before him with our burnt offerings,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part
in the LORD.

22:28 Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again,
Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you.

22:29 God forbid that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn this
day from following the LORD, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the LORD
our God that is before his tabernacle.

22:30 And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him,
heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad
and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.

22:31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the
children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of
Manasseh, This day we perceive that the LORD is among us, because ye
have not committed this trespass against the LORD: now ye have
delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD.

22:32 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes,
returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad,
out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of
Israel, and brought them word again.

22:33 And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children
of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad
dwelt.

22:34 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the
altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the LORD is God.

23:1 And it came to pass a long time after that the LORD had given
rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, I am old and stricken in age: 23:3 And ye have seen all
that the LORD your God hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the LORD your God is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the
nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 And the LORD your God, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the LORD your God hath promised unto you.

23:6 Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 That ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 But cleave unto the LORD your
God, as ye have done unto this day.

23:9 For the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day.

23:10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the LORD your God, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.

23:11 Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD
your God.

23:12 Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 Know
for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of
these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto
you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.

23:14 And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spake
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof.

23:15 Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are
come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so shall the LORD
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.

23:16 When ye have transgressed the covenant of the LORD your God,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the LORD be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and
called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
God.

24:2 And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him Isaac.

24:4 And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount
Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.

24:5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to
that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.

24:6 And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the Red sea.

24:7 And when they cried unto the LORD, he put darkness between you
and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilderness a long season.

24:8 And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on
the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into
your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from
before you.

24:9 Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred
against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse
you: 24:10 But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed
you still: so I delivered you out of his hand.

24:11 And you went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of
Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.

24:12 And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from
before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thy bow.

24:13 And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.

24:14 Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD.

24:15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
LORD.

24:16 And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should
forsake the LORD, to serve other gods; 24:17 For the LORD our God, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 And the LORD drave out from
before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the LORD; for he is our God.

24:19 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the LORD: for
he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins.

24:20 If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the
LORD.

24:22 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve him. And they
said, We are witnesses.

24:23 Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD God of Israel.

24:24 And the people said unto Joshua, The LORD our God will we serve,
and his voice will we obey.

24:25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.

24:26 And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the LORD.

24:27 And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your God.

24:28 So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

24:29 And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of
Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years
old.

24:30 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of Gaash.

24:31 And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the
works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel.

24:32 And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up
out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which
Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
Joseph.

24:33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
Ephraim.




The Book of Judges


1:1 Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children
of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them?  1:2 And the LORD said, Judah
shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.

1:3 And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go
with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.

1:4 And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the
Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten
thousand men.

1:5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

1:6 But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

1:7 And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I
have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem,
and there he died.

1:8 Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city
on fire.

1:9 And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the
Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley.

1:10 And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now
the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai.

1:11 And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the
name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher: 1:12 And Caleb said, He that
smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife.

1:13 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it:
and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

1:14 And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb
said unto her, What wilt thou?  1:15 And she said unto him, Give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of
water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.

1:16 And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out
of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the
wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people.

1:17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the
Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the
name of the city was called Hormah.

1:18 Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the
coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.

1:19 And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron.

1:20 And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of Anak.

1:21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of
Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.

1:22 And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and
the LORD was with them.

1:23 And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of
the city before was Luz.)  1:24 And the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the
entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

1:25 And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all
his family.

1:26 And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city,
and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this
day.

1:27 Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and
her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and
her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the
inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell
in that land.

1:28 And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the
Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.

1:29 Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer;
but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.

1:30 Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and
became tributaries.

1:31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the
inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor
of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 1:32 But the Asherites dwelt among the
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them
out.

1:33 Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh,
nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites,
the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of
Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.

1:34 And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 But
the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim:
yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.

1:36 And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward.

2:1 And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said,
I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my
covenant with you.

2:2 And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this?  2:3 Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spake these words
unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the LORD.

2:6 And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

2:7 And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the LORD, that he did for Israel.

2:8 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an
hundred and ten years old.

2:9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
Gaash.

2:10 And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers:
and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.

2:11 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
served Baalim: 2:12 And they forsook the LORD God of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods,
of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger.

2:13 And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.

2:14 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they
could not any longer stand before their enemies.

2:15 Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against
them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto
them: and they were greatly distressed.

2:16 Nevertheless the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out
of the hand of those that spoiled them.

2:17 And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the LORD; but they did not so.

2:18 And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with
the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the
days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings
by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

2:19 And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said,
Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 I
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which Joshua left when he died: 2:22 That through them I may prove
Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD to walk therein, as
their fathers did keep it, or not.

2:23 Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out
hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.

3:1 Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by
them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;
3:2 Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3:3
Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the
Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount
Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.

3:4 And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of Moses.

3:5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites,
and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 3:6 And they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods.

3:7 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
forgat the LORD their God, and served Baalim and the groves.

3:8 Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and
the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years.

3:9 And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them,
even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.

3:10 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel,
and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of
Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against
Chushanrishathaim.

3:11 And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz
died.

3:12 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel,
because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD.

3:13 And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and
went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

3:14 So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen
years.

3:15 But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man
lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto
Eglon the king of Moab.

3:16 But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit
length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

3:17 And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was
a very fat man.

3:18 And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present.

3:19 But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said,
Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.

3:20 And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from
God unto thee.

And he arose out of his seat.

3:21 And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 3:22 And the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.

3:23 Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them.

3:24 When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that,
behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he
covereth his feet in his summer chamber.

3:25 And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened
not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened
them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.

3:26 And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the
quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.

3:27 And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in
the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him
from the mount, and he before them.

3:28 And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the LORD hath
delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down
after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not
a man to pass over.

3:29 And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.

3:30 So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the
land had rest fourscore years.

3:31 And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
Israel.

4:1 And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the
LORD, when Ehud was dead.

4:2 And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that
reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in
Harosheth of the Gentiles.

4:3 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine
hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
children of Israel.

4:4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel
at that time.

4:5 And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and
Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for
judgment.

4:6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of
Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel
commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of
Zebulun?  4:7 And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera,
the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and
I will deliver him into thine hand.

4:8 And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

4:9 And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the LORD
shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and
went with Barak to Kedesh.

4:10 And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.

4:11 Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the
father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and
pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.

4:12 And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up
to mount Tabor.

4:13 And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.

4:14 And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the
LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out
before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men
after him.

4:15 And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all
his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera
lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.

4:16 But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto
Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the
edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.

4:17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife
of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of
Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.

4:18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my
lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into
the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

4:19 And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to
drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him
drink, and covered him.

4:20 Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it
shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is
there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.

4:21 Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into
his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep
and weary. So he died.

4:22 And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and
the nail was in his temples.

4:23 So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the
children of Israel.

4:24 And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king
of Canaan.

5:1 Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the
people willingly offered themselves.

5:3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing
unto the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD God of Israel.

5:4 LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the
clouds also dropped water.

5:5 The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from
before the LORD God of Israel.

5:6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

5:7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel,
until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

5:8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield
or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?  5:9 My heart is toward
the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Bless ye the LORD.

5:10 Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way.

5:11 They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places
of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the
LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages
in Israel: then shall the people of the LORD go down to the gates.

5:12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak,
and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

5:13 Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty.

5:14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after
thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors,
and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

5:15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and
also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of
Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

5:16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of
the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of
heart.

5:17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships?
Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

5:18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field.

5:19 The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.

5:20 They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera.

5:21 The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

5:22 Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings,
the pransings of their mighty ones.

5:23 Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to
the help of the LORD against the mighty.

5:24 Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be,
blessed shall she be above women in the tent.

5:25 He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter
in a lordly dish.

5:26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's
hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head,
when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

5:27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed,
he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

5:28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through
the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the
wheels of his chariots?  5:29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she
returned answer to herself, 5:30 Have they not sped? have they not
divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of
divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers
colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that
take the spoil?  5:31 So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And
the land had rest forty years.

6:1 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and
the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.

6:2 And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of
the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in
the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

6:3 And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up,
and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up
against them; 6:4 And they encamped against them, and destroyed the
increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no
sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

6:5 For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came
as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were
without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

6:6 And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and
the children of Israel cried unto the LORD.

6:7 And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the
LORD because of the Midianites, 6:8 That the LORD sent a prophet unto
the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God
of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of
the house of bondage; 6:9 And I delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave
them out from before you, and gave you their land; 6:10 And I said
unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

6:11 And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which
was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son
Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the
Midianites.

6:12 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him,
The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.

6:13 And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why
then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our
fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt?
but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the Midianites.

6:14 And the LORD looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and
thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I
sent thee?  6:15 And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I
save Israel?  behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the
least in my father's house.

6:16 And the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou
shalt smite the Midianites as one man.

6:17 And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

6:18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry
until thou come again.

6:19 And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

6:20 And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.
And he did so.

6:21 Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his
sight.

6:22 And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD,
Gideon said, Alas, O LORD God! for because I have seen an angel of the
LORD face to face.

6:23 And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die.

6:24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it
Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

6:25 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 And build an altar unto the
LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take
the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shalt cut down.

6:27 Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had
said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night.

6:28 And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold,
the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was
by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was
built.

6:29 And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when
they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done
this thing.

6:30 Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that
he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because
he hath cut down the grove that was by it.

6:31 And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for
Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

6:32 Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal
plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

6:33 Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the
valley of Jezreel.

6:34 But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him.

6:35 And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was
gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto
Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

6:36 And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said, 6:37 Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all
the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said.

6:38 And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water.

6:39 And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me,
and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this
once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon
all the ground let there be dew.

6:40 And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only,
and there was dew on all the ground.

7:1 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with
him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the
host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of
Moreh, in the valley.

7:2 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel
vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.

7:3 Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying,
Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two
thousand; and there remained ten thousand.

7:4 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring
them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it
shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the
same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall
not go with thee, the same shall not go.

7:5 So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said
unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a
dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that
boweth down upon his knees to drink.

7:6 And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their
mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed
down upon their knees to drink water.

7:7 And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that
lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand:
and let all the other people go every man unto his place.

7:8 So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and
he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained
those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the
valley.

7:9 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine
hand.

7:10 But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down
to the host: 7:11 And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward
shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went
he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that
were in the host.

7:12 And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the
east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and
their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude.

7:13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a
cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along.

7:14 And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the
sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand
hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.

7:15 And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the
host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your
hand the host of Midian.

7:16 And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers.

7:17 And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so
shall ye do.

7:18 When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow
ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword
of the LORD, and of Gideon.

7:19 So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the
outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had
but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers that were in their hands.

7:20 And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in
their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the
LORD, and of Gideon.

7:21 And they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and
all the host ran, and cried, and fled.

7:22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every
man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of
Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.

7:23 And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of
Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after
the Midianites.

7:24 And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying,
come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto
Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves
together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan.

7:25 And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and
they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress
of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
Gideon on the other side Jordan.

8:1 And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
Midianites?  And they did chide with him sharply.

8:2 And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you?
Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage
of Abiezer?  8:3 God hath delivered into your hands the princes of
Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you?
Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

8:4 And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three
hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

8:5 And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of
bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.

8:6 And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and
Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
8:7 And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and
Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns
of the wilderness and with briers.

8:8 And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.

8:9 And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come
again in peace, I will break down this tower.

8:10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them,
about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the
children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand
men that drew sword.

8:11 And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the
east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was
secure.

8:12 And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took
the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the
host.

8:13 And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun
was up, 8:14 And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and
enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and
the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.

8:15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and
Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah
and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men
that are weary?  8:16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns
of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
Succoth.

8:17 And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the
city.

8:18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were
they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were
they; each one resembled the children of a king.

8:19 And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother:
as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.

8:20 And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the
youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.

8:21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and
Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels'
necks.

8:22 Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both
thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us
from the hand of Midian.

8:23 And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither
shall my son rule over you: the LORD shall rule over you.

8:24 And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that
ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had
golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)  8:25 And they
answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and
did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.

8:26 And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and
collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and
beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.

8:27 And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in
Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing
became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.

8:28 Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that
they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness
forty years in the days of Gideon.

8:29 And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.

8:30 And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for
he had many wives.

8:31 And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called Abimelech.

8:32 And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.

8:33 And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the
children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and
made Baalberith their god.

8:34 And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every
side: 8:35 Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal,
namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto
Israel.

9:1 And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his
mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of
the house of his mother's father, saying, 9:2 Speak, I pray you, in
the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either
that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons,
reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am
your bone and your flesh.

9:3 And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men
of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow
Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.

9:4 And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the
house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons,
which followed him.

9:5 And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon
one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal
was left; for he hid himself.

9:6 And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in Shechem.

9:7 And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.

9:8 The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.

9:9 But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over
the trees?  9:10 And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and
reign over us.

9:11 But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9:12 Then
said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.

9:13 And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which
cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9:14 Then
said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.

9:15 And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.

9:16 Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye
have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and
his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his
hands; 9:17 (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life
far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian: 9:18 And ye are
risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons,
threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech,
the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he
is your brother;) 9:19 If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with
Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech,
and let him also rejoice in you: 9:20 But if not, let fire come out
from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo;
and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of
Millo, and devour Abimelech.

9:21 And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of Abimelech his brother.

9:22 When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel, 9:23 Then God
sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the
men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech: 9:24 That the
cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his
brethren.

9:25 And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them:
and it was told Abimelech.

9:26 And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.

9:27 And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their
god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

9:28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is
Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and
Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for
why should we serve him?  9:29 And would to God this people were under
my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech,
Increase thine army, and come out.

9:30 And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the
son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.

9:31 And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold,
Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold,
they fortify the city against thee.

9:32 Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee,
and lie in wait in the field: 9:33 And it shall be, that in the
morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon
the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come
out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find
occasion.

9:34 And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by
night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.

9:35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of
the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were
with him, from lying in wait.

9:36 And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there
come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto
him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.

9:37 And Gaal spake again, and said, See there come people down by the
middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of
Meonenim.

9:38 Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the
people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with
them.

9:39 And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with
Abimelech.

9:40 And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were
overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.

9:41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his
brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.

9:42 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into
the field; and they told Abimelech.

9:43 And he took the people, and divided them into three companies,
and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were
come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote
them.

9:44 And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
them.

9:45 And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the
city, and sowed it with salt.

9:46 And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they
entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.

9:47 And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
Shechem were gathered together.

9:48 And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder,
and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do,
make haste, and do as I have done.

9:49 And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and
followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also,
about a thousand men and women.

9:50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and
took it.

9:51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled
all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them,
and gat them up to the top of the tower.

9:52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

9:53 And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's
head, and all to brake his skull.

9:54 Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and
said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A
women slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.

9:55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they
departed every man unto his place.

9:56 Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 9:57 And all the evil of
the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came
the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.

10:1 And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of
Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in
mount Ephraim.

10:2 And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was
buried in Shamir.

10:3 And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty
and two years.

10:4 And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they
had thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which
are in the land of Gilead.

10:5 And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.

10:6 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the
gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of
Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the LORD, and
served not him.

10:7 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold
them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the
children of Ammon.

10:8 And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel:
eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side
Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.

10:9 Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also
against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim;
so that Israel was sore distressed.

10:10 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also
served Baalim.

10:11 And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver
you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of
Ammon, and from the Philistines?  10:12 The Zidonians also, and the
Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and
I delivered you out of their hand.

10:13 Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will
deliver you no more.

10:14 Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation.

10:15 And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
pray thee, this day.

10:16 And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

10:17 Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped
in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together,
and encamped in Mizpeh.

10:18 And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he
shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

11:1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was
the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.

11:2 And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and
they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in
our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.

11:3 Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of
Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with
him.

11:4 And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of
Ammon made war against Israel.

11:5 And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against
Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of
Tob: 11:6 And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that
we may fight with the children of Ammon.

11:7 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me,
and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now
when ye are in distress?  11:8 And the elders of Gilead said unto
Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go
with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over
all the inhabitants of Gilead.

11:9 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home
again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver
them before me, shall I be your head?  11:10 And the elders of Gilead
said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witness between us, if we do not so
according to thy words.

11:11 Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people
made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his
words before the LORD in Mizpeh.

11:12 And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of
Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
against me to fight in my land?  11:13 And the king of the children of
Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took
away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto
Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably.

11:14 And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children
of Ammon: 11:15 And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took
not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:
11:16 But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the
wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh; 11:17 Then Israel
sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee,
pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto.
And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not
consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.

11:18 Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the
land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the
land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not
within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.

11:19 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the
king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land into my place.

11:20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but
Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and
fought against Israel.

11:21 And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people
into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all
the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

11:22 And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon
even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.

11:23 So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites
from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it?  11:24
Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to
possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess.

11:25 And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor,
king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and
in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the
coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover
them within that time?  11:27 Wherefore I have not sinned against
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be
judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of
Ammon.

11:28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the
words of Jephthah which he sent him.

11:29 Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed
over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from
Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.

11:30 And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, 11:31 Then
it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to
meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall
surely be the LORD's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

11:32 So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight
against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands.

11:33 And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith,
even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very
great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the
children of Israel.

11:34 And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she
was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

11:35 And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes,
and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou
art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the
LORD, and I cannot go back.

11:36 And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
unto the LORD, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of
thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of
thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.

11:37 And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let
me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

11:38 And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she
went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains.

11:39 And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned
unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had
vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, 11:40 That
the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah
the Gileadite four days in a year.

12:1 And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to
fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.

12:2 And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife
with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not
out of their hands.

12:3 And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my
hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD
delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me
this day, to fight against me?  12:4 Then Jephthah gathered together
all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead
smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of
Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.

12:5 And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the
Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were
escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him,
Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; 12:6 Then said they unto him,
Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to
pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages
of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and
two thousand.

12:7 And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the
Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

12:8 And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.

12:9 And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent
abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he
judged Israel seven years.

12:10 Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.

12:11 And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged
Israel ten years.

12:12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the
country of Zebulun.

12:13 And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged
Israel.

12:14 And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on
threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.

12:15 And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried
in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.

13:1 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines
forty years.

13:2 And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the
Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

13:3 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto
her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 13:5 For, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.

13:6 Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God
came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel
of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name: 13:7 But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the
womb to the day of his death.

13:8 Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and said, O my Lord, let the man
of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shall do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her
husband was not with her.

13:10 And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and
said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto
me the other day.

13:11 And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And
he said, I am.

13:12 And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we
order the child, and how shall we do unto him?  13:13 And the angel of
the LORD said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her
beware.

13:14 She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither
let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all
that I commanded her let her observe.

13:15 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, I pray thee, let us
detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

13:16 And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Though thou detain
me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt
offering, thou must offer it unto the LORD. For Manoah knew not that
he was an angel of the LORD.

13:17 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, What is thy name,
that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?  13:18 And
the angel of the LORD said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my
name, seeing it is secret?  13:19 So Manoah took a kid with a meat
offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did
wonderously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.

13:20 For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the
altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 But the angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah and to
his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the LORD.

13:22 And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we
have seen God.

13:23 But his wife said unto him, If the LORD were pleased to kill us,
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
at this time have told us such things as these.

13:24 And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the
child grew, and the LORD blessed him.

13:25 And the Spirit of the LORD began to move him at times in the
camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.

14:1 And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of
the daughters of the Philistines.

14:2 And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I
have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now
therefore get her for me to wife.

14:3 Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a
woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people,
that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And
Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

14:4 But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD,
that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time
the Philistines had dominion over Israel.

14:5 Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath,
and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
against him.

14:6 And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but
he told not his father or his mother what he had done.

14:7 And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased
Samson well.

14:8 And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to
see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees
and honey in the carcase of the lion.

14:9 And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to
his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told
not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

14:10 So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a
feast; for so used the young men to do.

14:11 And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companions to be with him.

14:12 And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto
you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the
feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty
change of garments: 14:13 But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall
ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said
unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.

14:14 And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days
expound the riddle.

14:15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto
Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the
riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye
called us to take that we have? is it not so?  14:16 And Samson's wife
wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not:
thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast
not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my
father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?  14:17 And she wept
before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to
pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon
him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.

14:18 And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before
the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? And what is stronger
than a lion?  and he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my
heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

14:19 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he went down to
Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger
was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.

14:20 But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used
as his friend.

15:1 But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will
go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him
to go in.

15:2 And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly
hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger
sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.

15:3 And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless
than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.

15:4 And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took
firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst
between two tails.

15:5 And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the
standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

15:6 Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered,
Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife,
and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt
her and her father with fire.

15:7 And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I
be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.

15:8 And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.

15:9 Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread
themselves in Lehi.

15:10 And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And
they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath
done to us.

15:11 Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock
Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are
rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said
unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.

15:12 And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we
may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said
unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

15:13 And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee.
And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.

15:14 And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him:
and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the cords that
were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his
bands loosed from off his hands.

15:15 And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand,
and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

15:16 And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.

15:17 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
Ramathlehi.

15:18 And he was sore athirst, and called on the LORD, and said, Thou
hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and
now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised?  15:19 But God clave an hollow place that was in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit
came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof
Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.

15:20 And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty
years.

16:1 Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And
they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of
the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when
it is day, we shall kill him.

16:3 And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them
up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.

16:4 And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the
valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.

16:5 And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto
her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what
means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him;
and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

16:6 And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy
great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict
thee.

16:7 And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs
that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

16:8 Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green
withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

16:9 Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the
chamber.

And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he
brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
fire. So his strength was not known.

16:10 And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be
bound.

16:11 And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that
never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

16:12 Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were
liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his
arms like a thread.

16:13 And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said
unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

16:14 And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The
Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and
went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

16:16 And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,
and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 16:17 That he
told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor
upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother's
womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall
become weak, and be like any other man.

16:18 And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the
Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she
began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

16:20 And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke
out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him.

16:21 But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.

16:24 And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

16:25 And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for
Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars.

16:26 And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer
me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I
may lean upon them.

16:27 Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.

16:28 And Samson called unto the LORD, and said, O Lord God, remember
me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O
God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.

16:29 And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

16:31 Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol
in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty
years.

17:1 And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.

17:2 And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his
mother said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my son.

17:3 And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto
the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.

17:4 Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took
two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
of Micah.

17:5 And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

17:6 In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.

17:7 And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of
Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.

17:8 And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to
the house of Micah, as he journeyed.

17:9 And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto
him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may
find a place.

17:10 And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father
and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year,
and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.

17:11 And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young
man was unto him as one of his sons.

17:12 And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his
priest, and was in the house of Micah.

17:13 Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD will do me good,
seeing I have a Levite to my priest.

18:1 In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the
tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto
that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the
tribes of Israel.

18:2 And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their
coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the
land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land:
who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they
lodged there.

18:3 When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the
young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
hast thou here?  18:4 And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth
Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest.

18:5 And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that
we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

18:6 And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is
your way wherein ye go.

18:7 Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
Zidonians, and had no business with any man.

18:8 And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, What say ye?  18:9 And they said, Arise, that
we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land.

18:10 When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large
land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of any thing that is in the earth.

18:11 And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of
Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
war.

18:12 And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah:
wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it
is behind Kirjathjearim.

18:13 And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the
house of Micah.

18:14 Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these
houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
now therefore consider what ye have to do.

18:15 And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young
man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.

18:16 And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war,
which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.

18:17 And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came
in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the
teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering
of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons
of war.

18:18 And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image,
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the
priest unto them, What do ye?  18:19 And they said unto him, Hold thy
peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a
father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the
house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family
in Israel?  18:20 And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst
of the people.

18:21 So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them.

18:22 And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men
that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together,
and overtook the children of Dan.

18:23 And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their
faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company?  18:24 And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and
what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee?  18:25 And the
children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us,
lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the
lives of thy household.

18:26 And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

18:27 And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest
which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet
and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt
the city with fire.

18:28 And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and
they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth
by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.

18:29 And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan
their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city
was Laish at the first.

18:30 And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan,
the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests
to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

18:31 And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, all
the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.

19:1 And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in
Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of
mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah.

19:2 And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four
whole months.

19:3 And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple
of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the
father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.

19:4 And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he
abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged
there.

19:5 And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in
the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said
unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
afterward go your way.

19:6 And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together:
for the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray
thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.

19:7 And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him:
therefore he lodged there again.

19:8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and
the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they
tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

19:9 And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and
his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him,
Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart
may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou
mayest go home.

19:10 But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and
departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there
were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.

19:11 And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the
servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in
into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.

19:12 And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into
the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will
pass over to Gibeah.

19:13 And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one
of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.

19:14 And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down
upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.

19:15 And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah:
and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for
there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.

19:16 And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the
field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in
Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.

19:17 And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in
the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and
whence comest thou?  19:18 And he said unto him, We are passing from
Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and
I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD;
and there is no man that receiveth me to house.

19:19 Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there
is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young
man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.

19:20 And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy
wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.

19:21 So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the
asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

19:22 Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of
the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man,
saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may
know him.

19:23 And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and
said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly;
seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.

19:24 Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I
will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth
good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.

19:25 But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his
concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and
abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to
spring, they let her go.

19:26 Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at
the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.

19:27 And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the
house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his
concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were
upon the threshold.

19:28 And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none
answered.

Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
unto his place.

19:29 And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid
hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into
twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.

19:30 And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of
the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds.

20:1 Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation
was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the
land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh.

20:2 And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of
Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God,
four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.

20:3 (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel
were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us,
how was this wickedness?  20:4 And the Levite, the husband of the
woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that
belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.

20:5 And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
have they forced, that she is dead.

20:6 And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have
committed lewdness and folly in Israel.

20:7 Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and
counsel.

20:8 And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of
us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.

20:9 But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we
will go up by lot against it; 20:10 And we will take ten men of an
hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a
thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the
people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin,
according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.

20:11 So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit
together as one man.

20:12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of
Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you?
20:13 Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which
are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of
their brethren the children of Israel.

20:14 But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of
the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of
Israel.

20:15 And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

20:16 Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
miss.

20:17 And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

20:18 And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of
God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first
to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said,
Judah shall go up first.

20:19 And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against Gibeah.

20:20 And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and
the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
Gibeah.

20:21 And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and
destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two
thousand men.

20:22 And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set
their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in
array the first day.

20:23 (And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD
until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up again
to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD
said, Go up against him.)  20:24 And the children of Israel came near
against the children of Benjamin the second day.

20:25 And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second
day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the
LORD, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the LORD.

20:27 And the children of Israel enquired of the LORD, (for the ark of
the covenant of God was there in those days, 20:28 And Phinehas, the
son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the LORD said, Go up; for
to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.

20:29 And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.

20:30 And the children of Israel went up against the children of
Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah,
as at other times.

20:31 And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and
were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of Israel.

20:32 And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before
us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and
draw them from the city unto the highways.

20:33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.

20:34 And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near
them.

20:35 And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of
Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand
and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.

20:36 So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the
men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto
the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.

20:37 And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the
liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the
edge of the sword.

20:38 Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and
the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise
up out of the city.

20:39 And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began
to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they
said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.

20:40 But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a
pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the
flame of the city ascended up to heaven.

20:41 And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin
were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.

20:42 Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto
the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them
which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.

20:43 Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them,
and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the
sunrising.

20:44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were
men of valour.

20:45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of
Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men;
and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of
them.

20:46 So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five
thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

20:47 But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the
rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.

20:48 And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of
Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men
of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the cities that they came to.

21:1 Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall
not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.

21:2 And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till
even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 And
said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that
there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?  21:4 And it came
to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an
altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

21:5 And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the
tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD?
For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the
LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.

21:6 And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their
brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.

21:7 How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have
sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to
wives?  21:8 And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel
that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none
to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.

21:9 For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.

21:10 And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants
of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the
children.

21:11 And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy
every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.

21:12 And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four
hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male:
and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of
Canaan.

21:13 And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of
Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto
them.

21:14 And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives
which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so
they sufficed them not.

21:15 And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD
had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.

21:16 Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for
wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of
Benjamin?  21:17 And they said, There must be an inheritance for them
that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of
Israel.

21:18 Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the
children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife
to Benjamin.

21:19 Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh
yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east
side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the
south of Lebonah.

21:20 Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go
and lie in wait in the vineyards; 21:21 And see, and, behold, if the
daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of
the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of
Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.

21:22 And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto
us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them
for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the
war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be
guilty.

21:23 And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives,
according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and
they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the
cities, and dwelt in them.

21:24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every
man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence
every man to his inheritance.

21:25 In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.




The Book of Ruth


1:1 Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there
was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to
sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.

1:2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife
Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued
there.

1:3 And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two
sons.

1:4 And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one
was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there
about ten years.

1:5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was
left of her two sons and her husband.

1:6 Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return
from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how
that the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread.

1:7 Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto
the land of Judah.

1:8 And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to
her mother's house: the LORD deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt
with the dead, and with me.

1:9 The LORD grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house
of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice,
and wept.

1:10 And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
people.

1:11 And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me?
are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands?  1:12 Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too
old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 Would ye
tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sakes that the hand of the LORD is gone out against me.

1:14 And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed
her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her.

1:15 And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

1:16 And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where
thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God
my God: 1:17 Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried:
the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.

1:18 When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her.

1:19 So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to
pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved
about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?  1:20 And she said unto
them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt
very bitterly with me.

1:21 I went out full and the LORD hath brought me home again empty:
why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the LORD hath testified against me,
and the Almighty hath afflicted me?  1:22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth
the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of
the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of
barley harvest.

2:1 And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth,
of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.

2:2 And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the
field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find
grace.

And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.

2:3 And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the
reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging
unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.

2:4 And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
The LORD be with you. And they answered him, The LORD bless thee.

2:5 Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers,
Whose damsel is this?  2:6 And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back
with Naomi out of the country of Moab: 2:7 And she said, I pray you,
let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she
came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she
tarried a little in the house.

2:8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by
my maidens: 2:9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and
go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and
drink of that which the young men have drawn.

2:10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and
said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?  2:11 And Boaz
answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that
thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest
not heretofore.

2:12 The LORD recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the LORD God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

2:13 Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

2:14 And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the
reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left.

2:15 And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men,
saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
2:16 And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and
leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.

2:17 So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.

2:18 And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
she had reserved after she was sufficed.

2:19 And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to
day?  and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge
of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought,
and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.

2:20 And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the
LORD, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the
dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen.

2:21 And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt
keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.

2:22 And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not
in any other field.

2:23 So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of
barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.

3:1 Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?  3:2 And now is
not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?  Behold, he
winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.

3:3 Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.

3:4 And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the
place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet,
and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.

3:5 And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do.

3:6 And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that
her mother in law bade her.

3:7 And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly,
and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

3:8 And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and
turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.

3:9 And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine
handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
a near kinsman.

3:10 And he said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou
hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

3:11 And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou
requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a
virtuous woman.

3:12 And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a
kinsman nearer than I.

3:13 Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the
kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee,
then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth: lie
down until the morning.

3:14 And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman
came into the floor.

3:15 Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold
it.

And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
on her: and she went into the city.

3:16 And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou,
my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.

3:17 And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he
said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.

3:18 Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished the thing this day.

4:1 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and,
behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho,
such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat
down.

4:2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye
down here. And they sat down.

4:3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the
country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
Elimelech's: 4:4 And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it
before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou
wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell
me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I
am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.

4:5 Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of
Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the
dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.

4:6 And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar
mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot
redeem it.

4:7 Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning
redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man
plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a
testimony in Israel.

4:8 Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew
off his shoe.

4:9 And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and
all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi.

4:10 Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased
to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance,
that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and
from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.

4:11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said,
We are witnesses. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine
house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of
Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:
4:12 And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare
unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD shall give thee of this young
woman.

4:13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto
her, the LORD gave her conception, and she bare a son.

4:14 And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the LORD, which hath
not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous
in Israel.

4:15 And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

4:16 And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it.

4:17 And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a
son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of
Jesse, the father of David.

4:18 Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,
4:19 And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab, 4:20 And Amminadab
begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 4:21 And Salmon begat Boaz,
and Boaz begat Obed, 4:22 And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.




The First Book of Samuel

Otherwise Called:

The First Book of the Kings


1:1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim,
and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the
son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite: 1:2 And he had two wives;
the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah:
and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.

1:3 And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli,
Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there.

1:4 And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah
his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions: 1:5 But
unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the
LORD had shut up her womb.

1:6 And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret,
because the LORD had shut up her womb.

1:7 And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of
the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.

1:8 Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou?
and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better
to thee than ten sons?  1:9 So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in
Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat
by a post of the temple of the LORD.

1:10 And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and
wept sore.

1:11 And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt
indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life,
and there shall no razor come upon his head.

1:12 And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the LORD,
that Eli marked her mouth.

1:13 Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.

1:14 And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee.

1:15 And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul before the LORD.

1:16 Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.

1:17 Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

1:18 And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

1:19 And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew
Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her.

1:20 Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel,
saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD.

1:21 And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

1:22 But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he
may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever.

1:23 And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good;
tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So
the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.

1:24 And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three
bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought
him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young.

1:25 And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.

1:26 And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the
woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD.

1:27 For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition
which I asked of him: 1:28 Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD;
as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the LORD. And he worshipped
the LORD there.

2:1 And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine
horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies;
because I rejoice in thy salvation.

2:2 There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thee:
neither is there any rock like our God.

2:3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of
your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed.

2:4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girded with strength.

2:5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath many children is waxed feeble.

2:6 The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
and bringeth up.

2:7 The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up.

2:8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the LORD's, and
he hath set the world upon them.

2:9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

2:10 The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the LORD shall judge the ends of
the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the
horn of his anointed.

2:11 And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did
minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest.

2:12 Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD.

2:13 And the priest's custom with the people was, that, when any man
offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in
seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand; 2:14 And he
struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the
fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in
Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.

2:15 Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

2:16 And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will
take it by force.

2:17 Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
LORD: for men abhorred the offering of the LORD.

2:18 But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with
a linen ephod.

2:19 Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearly sacrifice.

2:20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And
they went unto their own home.

2:21 And the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the
LORD.

2:22 Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

2:23 And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your
evil dealings by all this people.

2:24 Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the
LORD's people to transgress.

2:25 If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin against the LORD, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD
would slay them.

2:26 And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
LORD, and also with men.

2:27 And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus
saith the LORD, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house?  2:28 And did I choose him
out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of Israel?  2:29 Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at
mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest
thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of Israel my people?  2:30 Wherefore the LORD God of Israel
saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father,
should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from
me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.

2:31 Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house.

2:32 And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in
thine house for ever.

2:33 And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar,
shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the
increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.

2:34 And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

2:35 And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a
sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

2:36 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.

3:1 And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the
word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

3:2 And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 And
ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark
of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 That the LORD
called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.

3:5 And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me.
And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.

3:6 And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went
to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered,
I called not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the
LORD yet revealed unto him.

3:8 And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and
went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli
perceived that the LORD had called the child.

3:9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant
heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

3:10 And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times,
Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.

3:11 And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel,
at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

3:12 In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have
spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

3:13 For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.

3:14 And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the
iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.

3:15 And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.

3:16 Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he
answered, Here am I.

3:17 And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thee?
I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

3:18 And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he
said, It is the LORD: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground.

3:20 And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
established to be a prophet of the LORD.

3:21 And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed
himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD.

4:1 And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out
against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and
the Philistines pitched in Aphek.

4:2 And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and
when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines:
and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

4:3 And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel
said, Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to day before the
Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of
Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
the hand of our enemies.

4:4 So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth between
the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of God.

4:5 And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp,
all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

4:6 And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?
And they understood that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp.

4:7 And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into
the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
thing heretofore.

4:8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues
in the wilderness.

4:9 Be strong and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselves like men, and fight.

4:10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled
every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

4:11 And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, were slain.

4:12 And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to
Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his
head.

4:13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

4:14 And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth
the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.

4:15 Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim,
that he could not see.

4:16 And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and
I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my
son?  4:17 And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before
the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of God is taken.

4:18 And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that
he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had
judged Israel forty years.

4:19 And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to
be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

4:20 And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not,
neither did she regard it.

4:21 And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed
from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her
father in law and her husband.

4:22 And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of
God is taken.

5:1 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from
Ebenezer unto Ashdod.

5:2 When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the
house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

5:3 And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And
they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.

5:4 And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was
fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the
head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.

5:5 Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this
day.

5:6 But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the
coasts thereof.

5:7 And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark
of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore
upon us, and upon Dagon our god.

5:8 They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines
unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of
Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried
about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about
thither.

5:9 And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of
the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he
smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts.

5:10 Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass,
as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying,
They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us
and our people.

5:11 So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let
it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of
God was very heavy there.

5:12 And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cry of the city went up to heaven.

6:1 And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines
seven months.

6:2 And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, What shall we do to the ark of the LORD? tell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place.

6:3 And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send
it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
removed from you.

6:4 Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall
return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one
plague was on you all, and on your lords.

6:5 Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your
mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of
Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land.

6:6 Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among
them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?  6:7 Now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calves home from them: 6:8 And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go.

6:9 And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that
happened to us.

6:10 And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the
cart, and shut up their calves at home: 6:11 And they laid the ark of
the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the
images of their emerods.

6:12 And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went
after them unto the border of Bethshemesh.

6:13 And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it.

6:14 And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and
stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of
the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the LORD.

6:15 And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer
that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD.

6:16 And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they
returned to Ekron the same day.

6:17 And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned
for a trespass offering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one,
for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; 6:18 And the golden
mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
Joshua, the Bethshemite.

6:19 And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

6:20 And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this
holy LORD God? and to whom shall he go up from us?  6:21 And they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The
Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD.

7:2 And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of
Israel lamented after the LORD.

7:3 And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the LORD with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
LORD, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the Philistines.

7:4 Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and
served the LORD only.

7:5 And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for
you unto the LORD.

7:6 And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We
have sinned against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel
in Mizpeh.

7:7 And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were
gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up
against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were
afraid of the Philistines.

7:8 And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto
the LORD our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
Philistines.

7:9 And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for
Israel; and the LORD heard him.

7:10 And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines
drew near to battle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were smitten before Israel.

7:11 And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the
Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.

7:12 Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and
called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped
us.

7:13 So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines
all the days of Samuel.

7:14 And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were
restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof
did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was
peace between Israel and the Amorites.

7:15 And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

7:16 And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal,
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

7:17 And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there
he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD.

8:1 And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over Israel.

8:2 Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his
second, Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba.

8:3 And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

8:4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel unto Ramah, 8:5 And said unto him, Behold, thou art
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations.

8:6 But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to
judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD.

8:7 And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

8:8 According to all the works which they have done since the day that
I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that
asked of him a king.

8:11 And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots.

8:12 And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains
over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his
chariots.

8:13 And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers.

8:14 And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

8:15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to his officers, and to his servants.

8:16 And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

8:17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants.

8:18 And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear you in that day.

8:19 Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and
they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 That we also may
be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.

8:21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the LORD.

8:22 And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man
unto his city.

9:1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of
Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a
Benjamite, a mighty man of power.

9:2 And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a
goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier
person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any
of the people.

9:3 And the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to
Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses.

9:4 And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land
of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the
land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his
servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of
God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go.

9:7 Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we?  9:8 And the
servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he
spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)  9:10 Then said Saul to his
servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where
the man of God was.

9:11 And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?
9:12 And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 As soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him.

9:14 And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came,
saying, 9:16 To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of
the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me.

9:17 And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man
whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

9:18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I
pray thee, where the seer's house is.

9:19 And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of
Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?  9:21 And
Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?  9:22 And
Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons.

9:23 And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave
thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.

9:24 And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left!
set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with
Samuel that day.

9:25 And when they were come down from the high place into the city,
Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that
I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and Samuel, abroad.

9:27 And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said
to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.

10:1 Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance?  10:2 When thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the
border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do
for my son?  10:3 Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
10:4 And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread;
which thou shalt receive of their hands.

10:5 After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the
garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 And the
Spirit of the LORD will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man.

10:7 And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.

10:8 And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 And one of the same place answered and
said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul
also among the prophets?  10:13 And when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went
ye?  And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to Samuel.

10:15 And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said
unto you.

10:16 And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses
were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh;
10:18 And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 And ye have this day rejected your God,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us.
Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come
near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

10:21 When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should
yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the LORD hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the
people shouted, and said, God save the king.

10:25 Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts God had touched.

10:27 But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And
they despised him, and brought no presents. But he held his peace.

11:1 Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against
Jabeshgilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

11:2 And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I
make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.

11:3 And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days'
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul
said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the
tidings of the men of Jabesh.

11:6 And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

11:9 And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say
unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of Jabesh; and they were glad.

11:10 Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together.

11:12 And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel.

11:14 Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king
before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of
Israel rejoiced greatly.

12:1 And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day.

12:3 Behold, here I am: witness against me before the LORD, and before
his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it
you.

12:4 And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

12:5 And he said unto them, The LORD is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
And they answered, He is witness.

12:6 And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced
Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
Egypt.

12:7 Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the
LORD of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the
hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the
Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have sinned, because
we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

12:11 And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and
Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe.

12:12 And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the LORD your God was your king.

12:13 Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you.

12:14 If ye will fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continue following the LORD your
God: 12:15 But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel
against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD
be against you, as it was against your fathers.

12:16 Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the LORD
will do before your eyes.

12:17 Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the LORD, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in
asking you a king.

12:18 So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.

12:19 And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto
the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the
LORD with all your heart; 12:21 And turn ye not aside: for then should
ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain.

12:22 For the LORD will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people.

12:23 Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

12:25 But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
Israel, 13:2 Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two
thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a
thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the
people he sent every man to his tent.

13:3 And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in
Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.

13:4 And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the
Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.

13:5 And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven.

13:6 When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and
Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling.

13:8 And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel
had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him.

13:9 And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.

13:10 And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him.

13:11 And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered
themselves together at Michmash; 13:12 Therefore said I, The
Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made
supplication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded thee: for
now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.

13:14 But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the LORD hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
LORD commanded thee.

13:15 And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of
Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men.

13:16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped
in Michmash.

13:17 And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in
three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to
Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: 13:18 And another company turned the
way to Bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

13:19 Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel:
for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:
13:20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen
every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

13:21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

13:22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there
found.

13:23 And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
Michmash.

14:1 Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over
to the Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. But he told
not his father.

14:2 And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him
were about six hundred men; 14:3 And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub,
Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD's
priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that
Jonathan was gone.

14:4 And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over
unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one
side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was
Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.

14:5 The forefront of the one was situate northward over against
Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.

14:6 And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come,
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be
that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD
to save by many or by few.

14:7 And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine
heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.

14:8 Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and
we will discover ourselves unto them.

14:9 If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we
will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

14:10 But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for
the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign
unto us.

14:11 And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth
out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

14:12 And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his
armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing.
And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the
LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.

14:13 And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and
his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his
armourbearer slew after him.

14:14 And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer
made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow.

14:15 And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all
the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

14:16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another.

14:17 Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now,
and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold,
Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

14:18 And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the
ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.

14:19 And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the
noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased:
and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.

14:20 And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

14:21 Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with
Saul and Jonathan.

14:22 Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount
Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also
followed hard after them in the battle.

14:23 So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over
unto Bethaven.

14:24 And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had
adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food
until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the
people tasted any food.

14:25 And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey
upon the ground.

14:26 And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
the oath.

14:27 But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his
hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth;
and his eyes were enlightened.

14:28 Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly
charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth
any food this day. And the people were faint.

14:29 Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I
pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a
little of this honey.

14:30 How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?  14:31 And they
smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the
people were very faint.

14:32 And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them
with the blood.

14:33 Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the
LORD, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

14:34 And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say
unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating
with the blood.

And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the LORD.

14:36 And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said
the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.

14:37 And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he
answered him not that day.

14:38 And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

14:39 For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in
Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among
all the people that answered him.

14:40 Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and
Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto
Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect
lot.

And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

14:42 And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And
Jonathan was taken.

14:43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And
Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.

14:44 And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, Jonathan.

14:45 And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan,
that he died not.

14:46 Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the
Philistines went to their own place.

14:47 So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of
Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against
the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

14:48 And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered
Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

14:49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua:
and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the
firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal: 14:50 And the
name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.

14:51 And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was
the son of Abiel.

14:52 And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of
Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the LORD.

15:2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to
Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
Egypt.

15:3 Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in
Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.

15:5 And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

15:6 And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from
among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of
Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.

15:7 And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to
Shur, that is over against Egypt.

15:8 And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

15:9 But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

15:10 Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying, 15:11 It
repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it
grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all night.

15:12 And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was
told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.

15:13 And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou
of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the LORD.

15:14 And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?  15:15 And Saul
said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the
LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

15:17 And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed
thee king over Israel?  15:18 And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and
said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD?
15:20 And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the
LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought
Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.

15:21 But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the LORD thy God in Gilgal.

15:22 And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the
LORD, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have
transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I
feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

15:25 Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD.

15:26 And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee
from being king over Israel.

15:27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

15:28 And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.

15:31 So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD.

15:32 Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the
Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 And Samuel said, As the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

15:34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to
Gibeah of Saul.

15:35 And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he
had made Saul king over Israel.

16:1 And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I
have provided me a king among his sons.

16:2 And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me.
And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
sacrifice to the LORD.

16:3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.

16:4 And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem.
And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest
thou peaceably?  16:5 And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice
unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.
And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.

16:6 And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD's anointed is before him.

16:7 But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the LORD looketh on the heart.

16:8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And
he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.

16:9 Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the
LORD chosen this.

16:10 Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And
Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these.

16:11 And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he
said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said,
Arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that
day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.

16:14 But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil
spirit from the LORD troubled him.

16:15 And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee.

16:16 Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen
a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the LORD is with him.

16:19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me
David thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.

16:21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon
Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

17:1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and
pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.

17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the
Philistines.

17:3 And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them.

17:4 And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

17:5 And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass.

17:6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders.

17:7 And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his
spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him.

17:8 And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto
them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a
Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us.

17:10 And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

17:12 Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah,
whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of Saul.

17:13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third
Shammah.

17:14 And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.

17:15 But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep
at Bethlehem.

17:16 And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.

17:17 And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the
valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

17:20 And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle.

17:21 For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army.

17:22 And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

17:23 And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the
Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard
them.

17:24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid.

17:25 And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come
up?  surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
Israel.

17:26 And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall
be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living God?  17:27 And the people
answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?
17:30 And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

17:31 And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed
them before Saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.

17:33 And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth.

17:34 And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living God.

17:37 David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the
LORD be with thee.

17:38 And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go
with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.

17:40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the Philistine.

17:41 And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man
that bare the shield went before him.

17:42 And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.

17:44 And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

17:45 Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the
name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou
hast defied.

17:46 This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel.

17:47 And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD's, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the Philistine.

17:49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

17:50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of David.

17:51 Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled.

17:52 And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of Ekron.

And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim,
even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.

17:53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

17:54 And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

17:55 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said
unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth?
And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.

17:56 And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

17:57 And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine,
Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the
Philistine in his hand.

17:58 And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And
David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.

18:1 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and
Jonathan loved him as his own soul.

18:2 And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father's house.

18:3 Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul.

18:4 And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

18:5 And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
Saul's servants.

18:6 And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from
the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul
hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.

18:8 And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.

18:10 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God
came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
Saul's hand.

18:11 And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even
to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.

18:12 And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and
was departed from Saul.

18:13 Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

18:14 And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the LORD
was with him.

18:15 Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him.

18:16 But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and
came in before them.

18:17 And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will
I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD's
battles.

For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
Philistines be upon him.

18:18 And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my
father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?
18:19 But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter
should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the
Meholathite to wife.

18:20 And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and
the thing pleased him.

18:21 And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.
Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain.

18:22 And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David
secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

18:23 And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And
David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?  18:24 And the
servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.

18:25 And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not
any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged
of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand
of the Philistines.

18:26 And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David
well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

18:27 Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.

18:28 And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that
Michal Saul's daughter loved him.

18:29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became
David's enemy continually.

18:30 Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely
than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.

19:1 And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill David.

19:2 But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan
told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 And I will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune
with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.

19:4 And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said
unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David;
because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 For he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for
all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?  19:6
And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the
LORD liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those
things.

And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past.

19:8 And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the
Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.

19:10 And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.

19:11 Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying,
If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

19:14 And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is
sick.

19:15 And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring
him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.

19:16 And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

19:17 And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He
said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?  19:18 So David fled,
and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul
had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.

19:19 And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in
Ramah.

19:20 And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed
over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in
Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one
said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.

19:23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
Naioth in Ramah.

19:24 And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?  20:1 And
David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan,
What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 And he said unto him, God
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth
that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I
will even do it for thee.

20:5 And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

20:6 If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family.

20:7 If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.

20:8 Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father?  20:9 And Jonathan said, Far be
it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?  20:10 Then
said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly?  20:11 And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and
let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but
if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of
the LORD, that I die not: 20:15 But also thou shalt not cut off thy
kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut off
the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.

20:16 So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let
the LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies.

20:17 And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him:
for he loved him as he loved his own soul.

20:18 Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

20:19 And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.

20:20 And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I
shot at a mark.

20:21 And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows.
If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
hurt; as the LORD liveth.

20:22 But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thee away.

20:23 And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of,
behold, the LORD be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side,
and David's place was empty.

20:26 Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

20:27 And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan
his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day?  20:28 And Jonathan answered Saul, David
earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem: 20:29 And he said, Let
me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my
brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

20:30 Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto
him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that
thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother's nakedness?  20:31 For as long as the son of
Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him,
Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?  20:33 And Saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay David.

20:34 So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David,
because his father had done him shame.

20:35 And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.

20:36 And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I
shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

20:37 And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which
Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the
arrow beyond thee?  20:38 And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make
speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and
came to his master.

20:39 But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the
matter.

20:40 And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him,
Go, carry them to the city.

20:41 And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place
toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with
another, until David exceeded.

20:42 And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be between
me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose
and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.

21:1 Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was
afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone,
and no man with thee?  21:2 And David said unto Ahimelech the priest,
The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I
have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such
a place.

21:3 Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

21:4 And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread
under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have
kept themselves at least from women.

21:5 And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

21:6 So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

21:7 Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.

21:8 And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my
weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.

21:9 And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 And David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to
Achish the king of Gath.

21:11 And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the
king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances,
saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
21:12 And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid
of Achish the king of Gath.

21:13 And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let
his spittle fall down upon his beard.

21:14 Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefore then have ye brought him to me?  21:15 Have I need of mad
men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my
presence? shall this fellow come into my house?  22:1 David therefore
departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his
brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto
him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundred men.

22:3 And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the
king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.

22:4 And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that David was in the hold.

22:5 And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and
came into the forest of Hareth.

22:6 When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his
spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;) 22:7
Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye
Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds; 22:8 That all of you have conspired against me, and there is
none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of
Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto
me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait,
as at this day?  22:9 Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set
over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to
Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.

22:10 And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and
gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.

22:11 Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of
Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered,
Here I am, my lord.

22:13 And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou
and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to
lie in wait, as at this day?  22:14 Then Ahimelech answered the king,
and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David,
which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is
honourable in thine house?  22:15 Did I then begin to enquire of God
for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his
servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less or more.

22:16 And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and
all thy father's house.

22:17 And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn,
and slay the priests of the LORD: because their hand also is with
David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me.
But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the priests of the LORD.

22:18 And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

22:20 And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named
Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.

22:21 And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the LORD's
priests.

22:22 And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the
Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

22:23 Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight
against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 Therefore David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go and
smite these Philistines? And the LORD said unto David, Go, and smite
the Philistines, and save Keilah.

23:3 And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in
Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of
the Philistines?  23:4 Then David enquired of the LORD yet again. And
the LORD answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will
deliver the Philistines into thine hand.

23:5 So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the
Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

23:6 And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to
David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul
said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

23:8 And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
Keilah, to besiege David and his men.

23:9 And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.

23:10 Then said David, O LORD God of Israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the
city for my sake.

23:11 Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? O LORD God of Israel, I beseech
thee, tell thy servant. And the LORD said, He will come down.

23:12 Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of Saul? And the LORD said, They will deliver thee up.

23:13 Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it
was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every
day, but God delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David
was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.

23:16 And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in God.

23:17 And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall
be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.

23:18 And they two made a covenant before the LORD: and David abode in
the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.

23:19 Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not
David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?  23:20 Now therefore, O
king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.

23:21 And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the LORD; for ye have compassion
on me.

23:22 Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth very subtilly.

23:23 See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of
Judah.

23:24 And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his
men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of
Jeshimon.

23:25 Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David;
wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the
wilderness of Maon.

23:26 And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his
men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for
fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round
about to take them.

23:27 But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and
come; for the Philistines have invaded the land.

23:28 Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went
against the Philistines: therefore they called that place
Selahammahlekoth.

23:29 And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at
Engedi.

24:1 And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the
Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the
wilderness of Engedi.

24:2 Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and
went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

24:3 And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the
sides of the cave.

24:4 And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the
LORD said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then
David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.

24:5 And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him,
because he had cut off Saul's skirt.

24:6 And he said unto his men, The LORD forbid that I should do this
thing unto my master, the LORD's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the LORD.

24:7 So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them
not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on his way.

24:8 David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him,
David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

24:9 And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words,
saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?  24:10 Behold, this day thine
eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
he is the LORD's anointed.

24:11 Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee
not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in
mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my
soul to take it.

24:12 The LORD judge between me and thee, and the LORD avenge me of
thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from
the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 The LORD therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

24:16 And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking
these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son
David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

24:17 And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou
hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.

24:18 And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?
wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father's house.

24:22 And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David
arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

25:2 And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.

25:3 Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife
Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he
was of the house of Caleb.

25:4 And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.

25:5 And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young
men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:
25:6 And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be
both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that
thou hast.

25:7 And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds
which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing
unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.

25:8 Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the
young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give,
I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to
thy son David.

25:9 And when David's young men came, they spake to Nabal according to
all those words in the name of David, and ceased.

25:10 And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? and
who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break
away every man from his master.

25:11 Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I
have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not
whence they be?  25:12 So David's young men turned their way, and went
again, and came and told him all those sayings.

25:13 And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And
they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his
sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two
hundred abode by the stuff.

25:14 But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying,
Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our
master; and he railed on them.

25:15 But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt,
neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them,
when we were in the fields: 25:16 They were a wall unto us both by
night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

25:17 Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is
determined against our master, and against all his household: for he
is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

25:18 Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two
bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred
cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.

25:19 And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come
after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.

25:20 And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

25:22 So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of
all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against
the wall.

25:23 And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass,
and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
25:24 And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let
this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

25:25 Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even
Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is
with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom
thou didst send.

25:26 Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul
liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine
enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.

25:27 And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

25:28 I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the
LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord
fighteth the battles of the LORD, and evil hath not been found in thee
all thy days.

25:29 Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy
God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out
of the middle of a sling.

25:30 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee,
and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel; 25:31 That this shall
be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself:
but when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember
thine handmaid.

25:32 And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel,
which sent thee this day to meet me: 25:33 And blessed be thy advice,
and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

25:34 For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to
meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall.

25:35 So David received of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have
hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

25:36 And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within
him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or
more, until the morning light.

25:37 But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out
of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died
within him, and he became as a stone.

25:38 And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote
Nabal, that he died.

25:39 And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be
the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of
Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned
the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed
with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.

25:40 And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel,
they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and
said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.

25:42 And Abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five
damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers
of David, and became his wife.

25:43 David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of
them his wives.

25:44 But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti
the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.

26:1 And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David
hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?  26:2
Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three
thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the
wilderness of Ziph.

26:3 And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before
Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw
that Saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come
in very deed.

26:5 And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched:
and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner,
the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to
Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down
with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with
thee.

26:7 So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth his hand against the LORD's anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against
the LORD's anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from
the LORD was fallen upon them.

26:13 Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space being between them: 26:14 And David
cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest
thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that
criest to the king?  26:15 And David said to Abner, Art not thou a
valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast
thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in
to destroy the king thy lord.

26:16 This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth,
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD's
anointed.

And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at his bolster.

26:17 And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son
David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

26:18 And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant?  for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. If the LORD have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods.

26:20 Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 The LORD render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness; for the LORD delivered thee into my hand to day, but I
would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed.

26:24 And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him
deliver me out of all tribulation.

26:25 Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David
went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.

27:1 And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the
hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should
speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall
despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I
escape out of his hand.

27:2 And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.

27:3 And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man
with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.

27:4 And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee?  27:6 Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.

27:7 And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines
was a full year and four months.

27:8 And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and
the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the
inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of
Egypt.

27:9 And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive,
and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels,
and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.

27:10 And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David
said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the
Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.

27:11 And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to
Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and
so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the
Philistines.

27:12 And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people
Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish
said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of
mine head for ever.

28:3 Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried
him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they
pitched in Gilboa.

28:5 And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart greatly trembled.

28:6 And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not,
neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.

28:7 Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his
servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
spirit at Endor.

28:8 And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he
went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and
he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.

28:9 And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
life, to cause me to die?  28:10 And Saul sware to her by the LORD,
saying, As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he
said, Bring me up Samuel.

28:12 And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art Saul.

28:13 And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived
that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself.

28:15 And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines
make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.

28:16 Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?  28:17 And the
LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
David: 28:18 Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 Moreover the LORD will also deliver Israel with thee into the
hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the LORD also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of
the Philistines.

28:20 Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled,
and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I
have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

28:23 But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants,
together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their
voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

28:24 And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 And she brought it before Saul, and before his
servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek:
and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.

29:2 And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with
Achish.

29:3 Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews
here?  And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not
this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him
since he fell unto me unto this day?  29:4 And the princes of the
Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines
said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his
place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith
should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the
heads of these men?  29:5 Is not this David, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten
thousands?  29:6 Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely,
as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not
found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

29:7 Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not
the lords of the Philistines.

29:8 And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast
thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this
day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
29:9 And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good
in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the
Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.

29:10 Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's
servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the
morning, and have light, depart.

29:11 So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to
return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up
to Jezreel.

30:1 And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag
on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and
Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire; 30:2 And had
taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either
great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.

30:3 So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned
with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were
taken captives.

30:4 Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their
voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

30:5 And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.

30:6 And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning
him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD
his God.

30:7 And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray
thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the
ephod to David.

30:8 And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shall I pursue after this
troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou
shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

30:9 So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

30:10 But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred
abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the
brook Besor.

30:11 And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to
David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink
water; 30:12 And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two
clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to
him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and
three nights.

30:13 And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art
thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite;
and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.

30:14 We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon
the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and
we burned Ziklag with fire.

30:15 And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company?
And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to
this company.

30:16 And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.

30:17 And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of
the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred
young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

30:18 And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away:
and David rescued his two wives.

30:19 And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great,
neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had
taken to them: David recovered all.

30:20 And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave
before those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.

30:21 And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that
they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the
brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people
that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted
them.

30:22 Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those
that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will
not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every
man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and
depart.

30:23 Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that
which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the
company that came against us into our hand.

30:24 For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is
that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by
the stuff: they shall part alike.

30:25 And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute
and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.

30:26 And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the
elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you
of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD; 30:27 To them which were in
Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were
in Jattir, 30:28 And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which
were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa, 30:29 And to
them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the
Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,
30:30 And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in
Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach, 30:31 And to them which
were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men
were wont to haunt.

31:1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel
fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

31:2 And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons;
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua,
Saul's sons.

31:3 And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him;
and he was sore wounded of the archers.

31:4 Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust
me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me
through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore
afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

31:5 And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell
likewise upon his sword, and died with him.

31:6 So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all
his men, that same day together.

31:7 And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the
valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men
of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the
cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

31:8 And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in
mount Gilboa.

31:9 And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent
into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the
house of their idols, and among the people.

31:10 And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they
fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.

31:11 And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the
Philistines had done to Saul; 31:12 All the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at
Jabesh, and fasted seven days.




The Second Book of Samuel

Otherwise Called:

The Second Book of the Kings


1:1 Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was
returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two
days in Ziklag; 1:2 It came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he
fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto
him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.

1:4 And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell
me.

And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of
the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are
dead also.

1:5 And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou
that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?  1:6 And the young man that
told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul
leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed
hard after him.

1:7 And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And
I answered, Here am I.

1:8 And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an
Amalekite.

1:9 He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me:
for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

1:10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he
could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was
upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought
them hither unto my lord.

1:11 Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise
all the men that were with him: 1:12 And they mourned, and wept, and
fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the
people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were
fallen by the sword.

1:13 And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou?
And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.

1:14 And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the LORD's anointed?  1:15 And David
called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And
he smote him that he died.

1:16 And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy
mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD's
anointed.

1:17 And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over
Jonathan his son: 1:18 (Also he bade them teach the children of Judah
the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)
1:19 The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
mighty fallen!  1:20 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

1:21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the
mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not
been anointed with oil.

1:22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow
of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

1:23 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
were stronger than lions.

1:24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your
apparel.

1:25 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan,
thou wast slain in thine high places.

1:26 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast
thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women.

1:27 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!  2:1
And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the LORD,
saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD
said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he
said, Unto Hebron.

2:2 So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite.

2:3 And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with
his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.

2:4 And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over
the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of
Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.

2:5 And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said
unto them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this
kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.

2:6 And now the LORD shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will
requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

2:7 Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant:
for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have
anointed me king over them.

2:8 But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth
the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim; 2:9 And made him
king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over
Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

2:10 Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign
over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed
David.

2:11 And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of
Judah was seven years and six months.

2:12 And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son
of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

2:13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out,
and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play
before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.

2:15 Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin,
which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the
servants of David.

2:16 And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.

2:17 And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten,
and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.

2:18 And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai,
and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

2:19 And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the
right hand nor to the left from following Abner.

2:20 Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he
answered, I am.

2:21 And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to
thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
armour.

But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.

2:22 And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following
me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I
hold up my face to Joab thy brother?  2:23 Howbeit he refused to turn
aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him
under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell
down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as
many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.

2:24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down
when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by
the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

2:25 And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after
Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

2:26 Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for
ever?  knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from
following their brethren?  2:27 And Joab said, As God liveth, unless
thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following his brother.

2:28 So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and
pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.

2:29 And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain,
and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to
Mahanaim.

2:30 And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered
all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men
and Asahel.

2:31 But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's
men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

2:32 And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night,
and they came to Hebron at break of day.

3:1 Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of
David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul
waxed weaker and weaker.

3:2 And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was
Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; 3:3 And his second, Chileab, of
Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the
son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 3:4 And the
fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son
of Abital; 3:5 And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These
were born to David in Hebron.

3:6 And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul
and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house
of Saul.

3:7 And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of
Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto
my father's concubine?  3:8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of
Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew
kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren,
and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of
David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this
woman?  3:9 So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the LORD
hath sworn to David, even so I do to him; 3:10 To translate the
kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over
Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.

3:11 And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared
him.

3:12 And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose
is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.

3:13 And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing
I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou
first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

3:14 And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying,
Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred
foreskins of the Philistines.

3:15 And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
Phaltiel the son of Laish.

3:16 And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to
Bahurim.

Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.

3:17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye
sought for David in times past to be king over you: 3:18 Now then do
it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my
servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the
Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

3:19 And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also
to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to
Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.

3:20 So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And
David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.

3:21 And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather
all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth.
And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

3:22 And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a
troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with
David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.

3:23 When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told
Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent
him away, and he is gone in peace.

3:24 Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done?
behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away,
and he is quite gone?  3:25 Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he
came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and
to know all that thou doest.

3:26 And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after
Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew
it not.

3:27 And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the
gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.

3:28 And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are
guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of
Ner: 3:29 Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father's
house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an
issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth
on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

3:30 So Joab, and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain
their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

3:31 And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him,
Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before
Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.

3:32 And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.

3:33 And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool
dieth?  3:34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters:
as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the
people wept again over him.

3:35 And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it
was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I
taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

3:36 And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as
whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

3:37 For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was
not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.

3:38 And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a
prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?  3:39 And I am this
day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be
too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according to
his wickedness.

4:1 And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands
were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.

4:2 And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name
of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of
Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also
was reckoned to Benjamin.

4:3 And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there
until this day.)  4:4 And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was
lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul
and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and
it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became
lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.

4:5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went,
and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay
on a bed at noon.

4:6 And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

4:7 For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and
took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

4:8 And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and
said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine
enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the
king this day of Saul, and of his seed.

4:9 And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of
Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who
hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, 4:10 When one told me,
saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I
took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would
have given him a reward for his tidings: 4:11 How much more, when
wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his
bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and
take you away from the earth?  4:12 And David commanded his young men,
and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged
them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth,
and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.

5:1 Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and
spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

5:2 Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that
leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thee, Thou
shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.

5:3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king
David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they
anointed David king over Israel.

5:4 David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years.

5:5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in
Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.

5:6 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the
inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou
take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither:
thinking, David cannot come in hither.

5:7 Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the
city of David.

5:8 And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter,
and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated
of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said,
The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

5:9 So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And
David built round about from Millo and inward.

5:10 And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was
with him.

5:11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.

5:12 And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over
Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's
sake.

5:13 And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem,
after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters
born to David.

5:14 And these be the names of those that were born unto him in
Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, 5:15 Ibhar
also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 5:16 And Elishama, and
Eliada, and Eliphalet.

5:17 But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king
over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David
heard of it, and went down to the hold.

5:18 The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
Rephaim.

5:19 And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up to the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said
unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into
thine hand.

5:20 And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and
said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the
breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place
Baalperazim.

5:21 And there they left their images, and David and his men burned
them.

5:22 And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in
the valley of Rephaim.

5:23 And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go
up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against
the mulberry trees.

5:24 And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then
shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the
Philistines.

5:25 And David did so, as the LORD had commanded him; and smote the
Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.

6:1 Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel,
thirty thousand.

6:2 And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him
from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose
name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between
the cherubims.

6:3 And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons
of Abinadab, drave the new cart.

6:4 And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at
Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.

6:5 And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD on
all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

6:6 And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his
hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

6:7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote
him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.

6:8 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon
Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.

6:9 And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shall the
ark of the LORD come to me?  6:10 So David would not remove the ark of
the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside
into the house of Obededom the Gittite.

6:11 And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the
Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed Obededom, and all his
household.

6:12 And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath blessed the
house of Obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the
ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house
of Obededom into the city of David with gladness.

6:13 And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had
gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

6:14 And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David
was girded with a linen ephod.

6:15 So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the
LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal
Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping
and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.

6:17 And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place,
in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and
David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.

6:18 And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings
and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of
hosts.

6:19 And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude
of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread,
and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people
departed every one to his house.

6:20 Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the
daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was
the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of
the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly
uncovereth himself!  6:21 And David said unto Michal, It was before
the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel:
therefore will I play before the LORD.

6:22 And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine
own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them
shall I be had in honour.

6:23 Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 7:2 That the king
said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar,
but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the LORD is with thee.

7:4 And it came to pass that night, that the word of the LORD came
unto Nathan, saying, 7:5 Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the
LORD, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?  7:6 Whereas I
have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the
children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in
a tent and in a tabernacle.

7:7 In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of
Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I
commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an
house of cedar?  7:8 Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant
David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote,
from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel: 7:9
And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all
thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like
unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

7:10 Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no
more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more,
as beforetime, 7:11 And as since the time that I commanded judges to
be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine
enemies. Also the LORD telleth thee that he will make thee an house.

7:12 And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

7:13 He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the
throne of his kingdom for ever.

7:14 I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 But my mercy shall not depart away from
him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

7:16 And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

7:17 According to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did Nathan speak unto David.

7:18 Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said,
Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  7:19 And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord
GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great
while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?  7:20 And
what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy
servant.

7:21 For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou
done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.

7:22 Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like
thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we
have heard with our ears.

7:23 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like
Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make
him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land,
before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the
nations and their gods?  7:24 For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy
people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art
become their God.

7:25 And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do
as thou hast said.

7:26 And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts
is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be
established before thee.

7:27 For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy
servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy
servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

7:28 And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true,
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 7:29 Therefore
now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it:
and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for
ever.

8:1 And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines,
and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the
Philistines.

8:2 And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death,
and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became
David's servants, and brought gifts.

8:3 David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he
went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.

8:4 And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.

8:5 And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of
Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

8:6 Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians
became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved
David whithersoever he went.

8:7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

8:8 And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David
took exceeding much brass.

8:9 When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host
of Hadadezer, 8:10 Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to
salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer,
and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought
with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:
8:11 Which also king David did dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver
and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued; 8:12
Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the
Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of
Rehob, king of Zobah.

8:13 And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

8:14 And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he
garrisons, and all they of Edom became David's servants. And the LORD
preserved David whithersoever he went.

8:15 And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.

8:16 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud was recorder; 8:17 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the
scribe; 8:18 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers.

9:1 And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of
Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?  9:2 And there
was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they
had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba?  And
he said, Thy servant is he.

9:3 And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that
I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king,
Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

9:4 And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the
king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in
Lodebar.

9:5 Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir,
the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.

9:6 Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was
come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David
said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!  9:7 And
David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness
for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of
Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.

9:8 And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?  9:9 Then the king called
to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy
master's son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.

9:10 Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the
land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's
son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat
bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty
servants.

9:11 Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the
king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for
Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the
king's sons.

9:12 And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all
that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.

9:13 So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at
the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.

10:1 And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.

10:2 Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to
comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David's
servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

10:3 And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their
lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath
sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants
unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
10:4 Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one
half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even
to their buttocks, and sent them away.

10:5 When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the
men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until
your beards be grown, and then return.

10:6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David,
the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob and the
Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a
thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men.

10:7 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

10:8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array
at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob,
and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

10:9 When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before
and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in
array against the Syrians: 10:10 And the rest of the people he
delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them
in array against the children of Ammon.

10:11 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee,
then I will come and help thee.

10:12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that which seemeth him
good.

10:13 And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the
battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.

10:14 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled,
then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab
returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.

10:15 And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel,
they gathered themselves together.

10:16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond
the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host
of Hadarezer went before them.

10:17 And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and
passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves
in array against David, and fought with him.

10:18 And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of
seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen,
and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

10:19 And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that
they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and
served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any
more.

11:1 And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when
kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with
him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and
besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.

11:2 And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off
his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the
roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful
to look upon.

11:3 And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not
this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
11:4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto
him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness:
and she returned unto her house.

11:5 And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am
with child.

11:6 And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And
Joab sent Uriah to David.

11:7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab
did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

11:8 And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.
And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a
mess of meat from the king.

11:9 But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the
servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

11:10 And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto
his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey?
why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?  11:11 And Uriah
said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and
my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open
fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to
lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not
do this thing.

11:12 And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I
will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the
morrow.

11:13 And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him;
and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with
the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

11:14 And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to
Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

11:15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may
be smitten, and die.

11:16 And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he
assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

11:17 And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and
there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the
Hittite died also.

11:18 Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;
11:19 And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of
telling the matters of the war unto the king, 11:20 And if so be that
the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye
so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall?  11:21 Who smote Abimelech the son of
Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him
from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then
say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

11:22 So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab
had sent him for.

11:23 And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed
against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them
even unto the entering of the gate.

11:24 And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and
some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite
is dead also.

11:25 Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto
Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one
as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and
overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

11:26 And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was
dead, she mourned for her husband.

11:27 And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to
his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing
that David had done displeased the LORD.

12:1 And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and
said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the
other poor.

12:2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds: 12:3 But the
poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought
and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his
children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and
lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

12:4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to
take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring
man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed
it for the man that was come to him.

12:5 And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he
said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this thing
shall surely die: 12:6 And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

12:7 And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the LORD
God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee
out of the hand of Saul; 12:8 And I gave thee thy master's house, and
thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel
and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the LORD, to do
evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword,
and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon.

12:10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house;
because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the
Hittite to be thy wife.

12:11 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes,
and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of this sun.

12:12 For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and before the sun.

12:13 And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the LORD. And
Nathan said unto David, The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou
shalt not die.

12:14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to
the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto
thee shall surely die.

12:15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the
child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.

12:16 David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

12:17 And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him
up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them.

12:18 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And
the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for
they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself,
if we tell him that the child is dead?  12:19 But when David saw that
his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead:
therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they
said, He is dead.

12:20 Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed
himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the LORD,
and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required,
they set bread before him, and he did eat.

12:21 Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive;
but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept:
for I said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon:
and the LORD loved him.

12:25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his
name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.

12:26 And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought
against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

12:28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called
after my name.

12:29 And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah,
and fought against it, and took it.

12:30 And he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight
whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set
on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great
abundance.

12:31 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the
cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned
unto Jerusalem.

13:1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had
a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved
her.

13:2 And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar;
for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do anything
to her.

13:3 But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of
Shimeah David's brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.

13:4 And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king's son, lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I
love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

13:5 And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make
thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I
pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the
meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

13:6 So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was
come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my
sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat
at her hand.

13:7 Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother
Amnon's house, and dress him meat.

13:8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down.
And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and
did bake the cakes.

13:9 And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he
refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they
went out every man from him.

13:10 And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that
I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made,
and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.

13:11 And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of
her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.

13:12 And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no
such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.

13:13 And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee,
thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray
thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.

13:14 Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger
than she, forced her, and lay with her.

13:15 Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith
he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And
Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.

13:16 And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending
me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he
would not hearken unto her.

13:17 Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said,
Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

13:18 And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such
robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his
servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

13:19 And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers
colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
crying.

13:20 And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother
been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother;
regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother
Absalom's house.

13:21 But when king David heard of all these things, he was very
wroth.

13:22 And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad:
for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.

13:23 And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had
sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom
invited all the king's sons.

13:24 And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant
hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go
with thy servant.

13:25 And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he
would not go, but blessed him.

13:26 Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go
with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?
13:27 But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king's
sons go with him.

13:28 Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when
Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite
Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be
courageous, and be valiant.

13:29 And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had
commanded.

Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his
mule, and fled.

13:30 And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings
came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and
there is not one of them left.

13:31 Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the
earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

13:32 And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and
said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men
the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of
Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his
sister Tamar.

13:33 Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his
heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is
dead.

13:34 But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted
up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the
way of the hill side behind him.

13:35 And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king's sons come: as
thy servant said, so it is.

13:36 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and
wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

13:37 But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king
of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.

13:38 So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.

13:39 And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for
he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.

14:1 Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was
toward Absalom.

14:2 And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and
said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a
woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 14:3 And come to the
king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her
mouth.

14:4 And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her
face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.

14:5 And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I
am indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.

14:6 And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in
the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the
other, and slew him.

14:7 And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid,
and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill
him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the
heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall
not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.

14:8 And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will
give charge concerning thee.

14:9 And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the
iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his
throne be guiltless.

14:10 And the king said, Whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to
me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

14:11 Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy
God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy
any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth,
there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.

14:12 Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one
word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.

14:13 And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a
thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as
one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his
banished.

14:14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any
person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled
from him.

14:15 Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord
the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy
handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king
will perform the request of his handmaid.

14:16 For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand
of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the
inheritance of God.

14:17 Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now
be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to
discern good and bad: therefore the LORD thy God will be with thee.

14:18 Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from
me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said,
Let my lord the king now speak.

14:19 And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
this?  And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord
the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 To
fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing:
and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to
know all things that are in the earth.

14:21 And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing:
go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.

14:22 And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I
have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath
fulfilled the request of his servant.

14:23 So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to
Jerusalem.

14:24 And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him
not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the
king's face.

14:25 But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as
Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of
his head there was no blemish in him.

14:26 And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end
that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he
polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels
after the king's weight.

14:27 And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter,
whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

14:28 So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the
king's face.

14:29 Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king;
but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time,
he would not come.

14:30 Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab's field is near
mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom's
servants set the field on fire.

14:31 Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said
unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?  14:32 And
Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither,
that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from
Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in
me, let him kill me.

14:33 So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called
for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the
ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.

15:1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him
chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

15:2 And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate:
and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the
king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what
city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of
Israel.

15:3 And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right;
but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

15:4 Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land,
that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I
would do him justice!  15:5 And it was so, that when any man came nigh
to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and
kissed him.

15:6 And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the
king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.

15:7 And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the
king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto
the LORD, in Hebron.

15:8 For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria,
saying, If the LORD shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I
will serve the LORD.

15:9 And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to
Hebron.

15:10 But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel,
saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall
say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.

15:11 And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that
were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any
thing.

15:12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's
counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered
sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased
continually with Absalom.

15:13 And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the
men of Israel are after Absalom.

15:14 And David said unto all his servants that were with him at
Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from
Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring
evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

15:15 And the king's servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants
are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.

15:16 And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And
the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

15:17 And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and
tarried in a place that was far off.

15:18 And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the
Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred
men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.

15:19 Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou
also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou
art a stranger, and also an exile.

15:20 Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee
go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and
take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.

15:21 And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the LORD liveth, and
as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king
shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant
be.

15:22 And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with
him.

15:23 And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people
passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and
all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

15:24 And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing
the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and
Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the
city.

15:25 And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the
city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me
again, and shew me both it, and his habitation: 15:26 But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.

15:27 The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer?
return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy
son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

15:28 See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there
come word from you to certify me.

15:29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to
Jerusalem: and they tarried there.

15:30 And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up,
weeping as they went up.

15:31 And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators
with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the
mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to
meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 15:33 Unto whom
David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I
will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant
hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me
defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.

15:35 And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the
priests?  therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt
hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar
the priests.

15:36 Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz
Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send
unto me every thing that ye can hear.

15:37 So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came
into Jerusalem.

16:1 And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold,
Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses
saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred
bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of
wine.

16:2 And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba
said, The asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as
be faint in the wilderness may drink.

16:3 And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said
unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day
shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

16:4 Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained
unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may
find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.

16:5 And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a
man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son
of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

16:6 And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king
David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right
hand and on his left.

16:7 And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou
bloody man, and thou man of Belial: 16:8 The LORD hath returned upon
thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of
Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody man.

16:9 Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should
this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and
take off his head.

16:10 And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of
Zeruiah?  so let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him, Curse
David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?  16:11 And
David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which
came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this
Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath
bidden him.

16:12 It may be that the LORD will look on mine affliction, and that
the LORD will requite me good for his cursing this day.

16:13 And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on
the hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw
stones at him, and cast dust.

16:14 And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,
and refreshed themselves there.

16:15 And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to
Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

16:16 And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend,
was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the
king, God save the king.

16:17 And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
why wentest thou not with thy friend?  16:18 And Hushai said unto
Absalom, Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of
Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.

16:19 And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the
presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so
will I be in thy presence.

16:20 Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we
shall do.

16:21 And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father's
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall
hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all
Israel.

16:23 And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those
days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all
the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.

17:1 Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this
night: 17:2 And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him
shall flee; and I will smite the king only: 17:3 And I will bring back
all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

17:4 And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of
Israel.

17:5 Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us
hear likewise what he saith.

17:6 And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him,
saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after
his saying? if not; speak thou.

17:7 And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath
given is not good at this time.

17:8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they
be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of
her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not
lodge with the people.

17:9 Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it
will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that
whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people
that follow Absalom.

17:10 And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a
lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a
mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

17:11 Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto
thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.

17:12 So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found,
and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of
him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so
much as one.

17:13 Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel
bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until
there be not one small stone found there.

17:14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of
Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the
LORD had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the
intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.

17:15 Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus
and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and
thus and thus have I counselled.

17:16 Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not
this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over;
lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

17:17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not
be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and
they went and told king David.

17:18 Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went
both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which
had a well in his court; whither they went down.

17:19 And the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth,
and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

17:20 And when Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they
said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them,
They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and
could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

17:21 And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up
out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David,
Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel
counselled against you.

17:22 Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and
they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of
them that was not gone over Jordan.

17:23 And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his
city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died,
and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

17:24 Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he
and all the men of Israel with him.

17:25 And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab:
which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that
went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's
mother.

17:26 So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.

17:27 And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi
the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the
son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
17:28 Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
parched pulse, 17:29 And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of
kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for
they said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the
wilderness.

18:1 And David numbered the people that were with him, and set
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them.

18:2 And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of
Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah,
Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite.
And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you
myself also.

18:3 But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

18:4 And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And
the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands.

18:5 And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the
people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
Absalom.

18:6 So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the
battle was in the wood of Ephraim; 18:7 Where the people of Israel
were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great
slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

18:8 For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the
country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

18:10 And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw
Absalom hanged in an oak.

18:11 And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou
sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

18:12 And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand
shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand
against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and
Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man
Absalom.

18:13 Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life:
for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest
have set thyself against me.

18:14 Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took
three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom,
while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

18:15 And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compassed about and
smote Absalom, and slew him.

18:16 And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
after Israel: for Joab held back the people.

18:17 And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel
fled every one to his tent.

18:18 Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself
a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, I have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own
name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom's place.

18:19 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the
king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies.

18:20 And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day,
but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear
no tidings, because the king's son is dead.

18:21 Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen.
And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.

18:22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But
howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said,
Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings
ready?  18:23 But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto
him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.

18:24 And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to
the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and behold a man running alone.

18:25 And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If
he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and
drew near.

18:26 And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman
called unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone.
And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.

18:27 And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He
is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he
fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said,
Blessed be the LORD thy God, which hath delivered up the men that
lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz
answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

18:30 And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he
turned aside, and stood still.

18:31 And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the
king: for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And
Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son,
my son!  19:1 And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for Absalom.

19:2 And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
his son.

19:3 And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud
voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!  19:5 And Joab
came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day
the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and
the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy
wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 19:6 In that thou lovest thine
enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that
thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive,
that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had
pleased thee well.

19:7 Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy
servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there will
not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee
than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

19:8 Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all
the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the
people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his
tent.

19:9 And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and
he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled
out of the land for Absalom.

19:10 And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?  19:11
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying,
Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 And say ye to Amasa,
Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the
room of Joab.

19:14 And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to
Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.

19:16 And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim,
hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.

19:17 And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the
servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty
servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.

19:18 And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's
household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera
fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan; 19:19 And said
unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do
thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my
lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to
his heart.

19:20 For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold,
I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to
meet my lord the king.

19:21 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not
Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD's
anointed?  19:22 And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons
of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know
that I am this day king over Israel?  19:23 Therefore the king said
unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him.

19:24 And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and
had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in
peace.

19:25 And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the
king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me,
Mephibosheth?  19:26 And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant
deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may
ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.

19:27 And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my
lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in
thine eyes.

19:28 For all of my father's house were but dead men before my lord
the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at
thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto
the king?  19:29 And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any
more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.

19:30 And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own
house.

19:31 And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went
over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.

19:32 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and
he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for
he was a very great man.

19:33 And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I
will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.

19:34 And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that
I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?  19:35 I am this day
fourscore years old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy
servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the
voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy
servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?  19:36 Thy servant will
go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king
recompense it me with such a reward?  19:37 Let thy servant, I pray
thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried
by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant
Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what
shall seem good unto thee.

19:38 And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will
do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou
shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.

19:39 And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come
over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto
his own place.

19:40 Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him:
and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the
people of Israel.

19:41 And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said
unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee
away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David's
men with him, over Jordan?  19:42 And all the men of Judah answered
the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore
then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king's
cost? or hath he given us any gift?  19:43 And the men of Israel
answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king,
and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise
us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king?
And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the
men of Israel.

20:1 And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was
Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and
said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son
of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.

20:2 So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed
Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king,
from Jordan even to Jerusalem.

20:3 And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the
ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put
them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were
shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

20:4 Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within
three days, and be thou here present.

20:5 So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer
than the set time which he had appointed him.

20:6 And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do
us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and
pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

20:7 And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites, and
the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of
Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:8 When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went
before them. And Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto
him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the
sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

20:9 And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab
took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

20:10 But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand: so
he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to
the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai
his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:11 And one of Joab's men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth
Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.

20:12 And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And
when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out
of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw
that every one that came by him stood still.

20:13 When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on
after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:14 And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to
Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and
went also after him.

20:15 And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they
cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all
the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.

20:16 Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray
you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.

20:17 And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou
Joab?  And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the
words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.

20:18 Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time,
saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the
matter.

20:19 I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou
seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou
swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?  20:20 And Joab answered and
said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or
destroy.

20:21 The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son
of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even
against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And
the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee
over the wall.

20:22 Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they
cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab.
And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to
his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.

20:23 Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites: 20:24 And
Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.

21:1 Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year
after year; and David enquired of the LORD. And the LORD answered, It
is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.

21:2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of
the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul
sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)
21:3 Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for
you?  and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the
inheritance of the LORD?  21:4 And the Gibeonites said unto him, We
will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us
shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say,
that will I do for you.

21:5 And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that
devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any
of the coasts of Israel, 21:6 Let seven men of his sons be delivered
unto us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul,
whom the LORD did choose. And the king said, I will give them.

21:7 But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of
Saul, because of the LORD's oath that was between them, between David
and Jonathan the son of Saul.

21:8 But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah,
whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of
Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of
Barzillai the Meholathite: 21:9 And he delivered them into the hands
of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the LORD:
and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

21:10 And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it
for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water
dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the
air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

21:11 And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the
concubine of Saul, had done.

21:12 And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of
Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them,
when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa: 21:13 And he brought up
from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and
they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

21:14 And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the
country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and
they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was
intreated for the land.

21:15 Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and
David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
Philistines: and David waxed faint.

21:16 And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight
of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he
being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.

21:17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the
Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him,
saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench
not the light of Israel.

21:18 And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle
with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph,
which was of the sons of the giant.

21:19 And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where
Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of
Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's
beam.

21:20 And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great
stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six
toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

21:21 And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimeah the
brother of David slew him.

21:22 These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand
of David, and by the hand of his servants.

22:1 And David spake unto the LORD the words of this song in the day
that the LORD had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,
and out of the hand of Saul: 22:2 And he said, The LORD is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 The God of my rock; in him
will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

22:4 I will call on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I
be saved from mine enemies.

22:5 When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men
made me afraid; 22:6 The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the
snares of death prevented me; 22:7 In my distress I called upon the
LORD, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple,
and my cry did enter into his ears.

22:8 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven
moved and shook, because he was wroth.

22:9 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his
mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.

22:10 He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under
his feet.

22:11 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the
wings of the wind.

22:12 And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and
thick clouds of the skies.

22:13 Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.

22:14 The LORD thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his
voice.

22:15 And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and
discomfited them.

22:16 And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the
world were discovered, at the rebuking of the LORD, at the blast of
the breath of his nostrils.

22:17 He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;
22:18 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

22:19 They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my
stay.

22:20 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me,
because he delighted in me.

22:21 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to
the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

22:22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly
departed from my God.

22:23 For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I
did not depart from them.

22:24 I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine
iniquity.

22:25 Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me according to my
righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.

22:26 With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

22:27 With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

22:28 And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon
the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

22:29 For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the LORD will lighten my
darkness.

22:30 For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped
over a wall.

22:31 As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried:
he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

22:32 For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a rock, save our God?
22:33 God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

22:34 He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high
places.

22:35 He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by
mine arms.

22:36 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy
gentleness hath made me great.

22:37 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not
slip.

22:38 I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not
again until I had consumed them.

22:39 And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not
arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.

22:40 For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose
up against me hast thou subdued under me.

22:41 Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might
destroy them that hate me.

22:42 They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but
he answered them not.

22:43 Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did
stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

22:44 Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people,
thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not
shall serve me.

22:45 Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear,
they shall be obedient unto me.

22:46 Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their
close places.

22:47 The LORD liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God
of the rock of my salvation.

22:48 It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people
under me.

22:49 And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast
delivered me from the violent man.

22:50 Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O LORD, among the
heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name.

22:51 He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.

23:1 Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God
of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said, 23:2 The Spirit of
the LORD spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

23:3 The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that
ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

23:4 And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of
the earth by clear shining after rain.

23:5 Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all
my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

23:6 But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust
away, because they cannot be taken with hands: 23:7 But the man that
shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear;
and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.

23:8 These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The
Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same
was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom
he slew at one time.

23:9 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the
three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that
were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were
gone away: 23:10 He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand
was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the LORD wrought a
great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to
spoil.

23:11 And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the
Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of
ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.

23:12 But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and
slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought a great victory.

23:13 And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in
the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the
Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.

23:14 And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the
Philistines was then in Bethlehem.

23:15 And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!  23:16 And
the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and
drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and
took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink
thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD.

23:17 And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this:
is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty
men.

23:18 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief
among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and
slew them, and had the name among three.

23:19 Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their
captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.

23:20 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he
went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
23:21 And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a
spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked
the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

23:22 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name
among three mighty men.

23:23 He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to
the first three. And David set him over his guard.

23:24 Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the
son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 23:25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the
Harodite, 23:26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
23:27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite, 23:28 Zalmon
the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite, 23:29 Heleb the son of Baanah,
a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children
of Benjamin, 23:30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of
Gaash, 23:31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite, 23:32
Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 23:33
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite, 23:34
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the
son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, 23:35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the
Arbite, 23:36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 23:37
Zelek the Ammonite, Nahari the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the
son of Zeruiah, 23:38 Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite, 23:39 Uriah
the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.

24:1 And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and
he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.

24:2 For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to
Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the
people.

24:3 And Joab said unto the king, Now the LORD thy God add unto the
people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
this thing?  24:4 Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against
Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains
of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the
people of Israel.

24:5 And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right
side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and
toward Jazer: 24:6 Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of
Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon, 24:7 And
came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites,
and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even
to Beersheba.

24:8 So when they had gone through all the land, they came to
Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

24:9 And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the
king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.

24:10 And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the
people.

And David said unto the LORD, I have sinned greatly in that I have
done: and now, I beseech thee, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy
servant; for I have done very foolishly.

24:11 For when David was up in the morning, the word of the LORD came
unto the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying, 24:12 Go and say unto
David, Thus saith the LORD, I offer thee three things; choose thee one
of them, that I may do it unto thee.

24:13 So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall
seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee
three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that
there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what
answer I shall return to him that sent me.

24:14 And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now
into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are great: and let me not
fall into the hand of man.

24:15 So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even
to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to
Beersheba seventy thousand men.

24:16 And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel
that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the
angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.

24:17 And David spake unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote
the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be
against me, and against my father's house.

24:18 And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear
an altar unto the LORD in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.

24:19 And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the LORD
commanded.

24:20 And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on
toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on
his face upon the ground.

24:21 And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his
servant?  And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build
an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

24:22 And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer
up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt
sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen
for wood.

24:23 All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And
Araunah said unto the king, The LORD thy God accept thee.

24:24 And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of
thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the LORD my
God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the
threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

24:25 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings. So the LORD was intreated for the land,
and the plague was stayed from Israel.




The First Book of the Kings

Commonly Called:

The Third Book of the Kings


1:1 Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered
him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

1:2 Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my
lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and
let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the
king may get heat.

1:3 So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of
Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.

1:4 And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and
ministered to him: but the king knew her not.

1:5 Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will
be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him.

1:6 And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why
hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother
bare him after Absalom.

1:7 And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar
the priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.

1:8 But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan
the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
David, were not with Adonijah.

1:9 And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of Judah the king's servants: 1:10 But Nathan
the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother,
he called not.

1:11 Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon,
saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth
reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?  1:12 Now therefore come,
let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine
own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.

1:13 Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not
thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
why then doth Adonijah reign?  1:14 Behold, while thou yet talkest
there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 And Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the
king.

1:16 And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the
king said, What wouldest thou?  1:17 And she said unto him, My lord,
thou swarest by the LORD thy God unto thine handmaid, saying,
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne.

1:18 And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

1:20 And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord
the king after him.

1:21 Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall
sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted
offenders.

1:22 And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet
also came in.

1:23 And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And
when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king
with his face to the ground.

1:24 And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?  1:25 For he is gone
down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in
abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of
the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
before him, and say, God save king Adonijah.

1:26 But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him?  1:28 Then king David answered and said, Call me Bathsheba.
And she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.

1:29 And the king sware, and said, As the LORD liveth, that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress, 1:30 Even as I sware unto thee
by the LORD God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
will I certainly do this day.

1:31 Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever.

1:32 And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the
king.

1:33 The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your
lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to Gihon: 1:34 And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon.

1:35 Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to
be ruler over Israel and over Judah.

1:36 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said,
Amen: the LORD God of my lord the king say so too.

1:37 As the LORD hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
David.

1:38 So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and
caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to
Gihon.

1:39 And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, God save king Solomon.

1:40 And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar?  1:42 And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of
Abiathar the priest came; and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king
David hath made Solomon king.

1:44 And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the
Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:
1:45 And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.

1:46 And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

1:47 And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king
David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and
make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself
upon the bed.

1:48 And also thus said the king, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
seeing it.

1:49 And all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went every man his way.

1:50 And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the horns of the altar.

1:51 And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king
Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar,
saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me today that he will not slay his
servant with the sword.

1:52 And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar.
And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto
him, Go to thine house.

2:1 Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
Solomon his son, saying, 2:2 I go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 And keep the charge of
the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 That the LORD may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
throne of Israel.

2:5 Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me,
and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner
the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his
feet.

2:6 Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

2:7 But shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and
let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me
when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.

2:8 And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a
Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day
when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I
sware to him by the LORD, saying, I will not put thee to death with
the sword.

2:9 Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David.

2:11 And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years:
seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned
he in Jerusalem.

2:12 Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his
kingdom was established greatly.

2:13 And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of
Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.

2:14 He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said,
Say on.

2:15 And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all
Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom
is turned about, and is become my brother's: for it was his from the
LORD.

2:16 And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said
unto him, Say on.

2:17 And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he
will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to
wife.

2:18 And Bathsheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.

2:19 Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for
Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto
her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the
king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.

2:20 Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee,
say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I
will not say thee nay.

2:21 And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy
brother to wife.

2:22 And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost
thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the
priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

2:23 Then king Solomon sware by the LORD, saying, God do so to me, and
more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 Now therefore, as the LORD liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the LORD
God before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the LORD;
that he might fulfil the word of the LORD, which he spake concerning
the house of Eli in Shiloh.

2:28 Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah,
though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the LORD; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon
sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.

2:30 And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the LORD, and said unto
him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die
here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab,
and thus he answered me.

2:31 And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon
him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood,
which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.

2:32 And the LORD shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell
upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the
sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of
Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether,
captain of the host of Judah.

2:33 Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and
upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed,
and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever
from the LORD.

2:34 So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and
slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.

2:35 And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the
host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.

2:36 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build
thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence
any whither.

2:37 For it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over
the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely
die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

2:38 And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good: as my lord the
king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem
many days.

2:39 And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath.
And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath.

2:40 And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish
to seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from
Gath.

2:41 And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to
Gath, and was come again.

2:42 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I
not make thee to swear by the LORD, and protested unto thee, saying,
Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word
that I have heard is good.

2:43 Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the LORD, and the
commandment that I have charged thee with?  2:44 The king said
moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart
is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the LORD
shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head; 2:45 And king Solomon
shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before
the LORD for ever.

2:46 So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went
out, and fell upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established
in the hand of Solomon.

3:1 And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took
Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he
had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the LORD,
and the wall of Jerusalem round about.

3:2 Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no
house built unto the name of the LORD, until those days.

3:3 And Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his
father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

3:4 And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and
God said, Ask what I shall give thee.

3:6 And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my
father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on his throne, as it is this day.

3:7 And now, O LORD my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out
or come in.

3:8 And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.

3:9 Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people?  3:10 And the speech pleased the
LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing.

3:11 And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and
hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for
thyself understanding to discern judgment; 3:12 Behold, I have done
according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

3:13 And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings
like unto thee all thy days.

3:14 And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my
commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy
days.

3:15 And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to
Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and
offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a
feast to all his servants.

3:16 Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
stood before him.

3:17 And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one
house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.

3:18 And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered,
that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no
stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.

3:19 And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid
it.

3:20 And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while
thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead
child in my bosom.

3:21 And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it
was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was
not my son, which I did bear.

3:22 And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the
dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the
living is my son. Thus they spake before the king.

3:23 Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth,
and thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the
dead, and my son is the living.

3:24 And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword
before the king.

3:25 And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half
to the one, and half to the other.

3:26 Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king,
for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it
be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

3:27 Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and
in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

3:28 And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged;
and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in
him, to do judgment.

4:1 So king Solomon was king over all Israel.

4:2 And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok
the priest, 4:3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes;
Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.

4:4 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and
Abiathar were the priests: 4:5 And Azariah the son of Nathan was over
the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, and
the king's friend: 4:6 And Ahishar was over the household: and
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute.

4:7 And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided
victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year
made provision.

4:8 And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim: 4:9
The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and
Elonbethhanan: 4:10 The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained
Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher: 4:11 The son of Abinadab, in all
the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
4:12 Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo,
and all Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from
Bethshean to Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:
4:13 The son of Geber, in Ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of
Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained
the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with
walls and brasen bars: 4:14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:
4:15 Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of
Solomon to wife: 4:16 Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in
Aloth: 4:17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar: 4:18 Shimei
the son of Elah, in Benjamin: 4:19 Geber the son of Uri was in the
country of Gilead, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and
of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only officer which was in the
land.

4:20 Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.

4:21 And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the
land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought
presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.

4:22 And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine
flour, and threescore measures of meal, 4:23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty
oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and
roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.

4:24 For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river,
from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river:
and he had peace on all sides round about him.

4:25 And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and
under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of
Solomon.

4:26 And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,
and twelve thousand horsemen.

4:27 And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all
that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in his month: they
lacked nothing.

4:28 Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they
unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his
charge.

4:29 And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

4:30 And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

4:31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in
all nations round about.

4:32 And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a
thousand and five.

4:33 And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

4:34 And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.

5:1 And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had
heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for
Hiram was ever a lover of David.

5:2 And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, 5:3 Thou knowest how that David
my father could not build an house unto the name of the LORD his God
for the wars which were about him on every side, until the LORD put
them under the soles of his feet.

5:4 But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side, so that
there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.

5:5 And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the LORD
my God, as the LORD spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom
I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto
my name.

5:6 Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of
Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee
will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt
appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can
skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.

5:7 And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that
he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the LORD this day, which
hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.

5:8 And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things
which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning
timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

5:9 My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I
will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt
appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt
receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for
my household.

5:10 So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all
his desire.

5:11 And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food
to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon
to Hiram year by year.

5:12 And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there
was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league
together.

5:13 And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy
was thirty thousand men.

5:14 And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a
month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was
over the levy.

5:15 And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens,
and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains; 5:16 Beside the chief
of Solomon's officers which were over the work, three thousand and
three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.

5:17 And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly
stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.

5:18 And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the
stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.

6:1 And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after
the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the
fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is
the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD.

6:2 And the house which king Solomon built for the LORD, the length
thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits,
and the height thereof thirty cubits.

6:3 And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was
the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten
cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.

6:4 And for the house he made windows of narrow lights.

6:5 And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about,
against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of
the oracle: and he made chambers round about: 6:6 The nethermost
chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad,
and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the
house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be
fastened in the walls of the house.

6:7 And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made
ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
building.

6:8 The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the
house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber,
and out of the middle into the third.

6:9 So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with
beams and boards of cedar.

6:10 And then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits
high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.

6:11 And the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying, 6:12 Concerning
this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my
statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to
walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake
unto David thy father: 6:13 And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.

6:14 So Solomon built the house, and finished it.

6:15 And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,
both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: and he
covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the
house with planks of fir.

6:16 And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the
floor and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built them for it
within, even for the oracle, even for the most holy place.

6:17 And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits
long.

6:18 And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open
flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.

6:19 And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.

6:20 And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and
twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and
he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of
cedar.

6:21 So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made
a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid
it with gold.

6:22 And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished
all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid
with gold.

6:23 And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each
ten cubits high.

6:24 And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits
the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing
unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.

6:25 And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of
one measure and one size.

6:26 The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the
other cherub.

6:27 And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and they
stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the
one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the
other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the
house.

6:28 And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.

6:29 And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved
figures of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, within and
without.

6:30 And the floors of the house he overlaid with gold, within and
without.

6:31 And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree:
the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.

6:32 The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them
carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid
them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm
trees.

6:33 So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a
fourth part of the wall.

6:34 And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one
door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.

6:35 And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers:
and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.

6:36 And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and
a row of cedar beams.

6:37 In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the LORD
laid, in the month Zif: 6:38 And in the eleventh year, in the month
Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all
the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he
seven years in building it.

7:1 But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he
finished all his house.

7:2 He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length
thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits,
and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars,
with cedar beams upon the pillars.

7:3 And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on
forty five pillars, fifteen in a row.

7:4 And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light
in three ranks.

7:5 And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and
light was against light in three ranks.

7:6 And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty
cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was
before them: and the other pillars and the thick beam were before
them.

7:7 Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the
porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the
floor to the other.

7:8 And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch,
which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh's
daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.

7:9 All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of
hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the
foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great
court.

7:10 And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones,
stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

7:11 And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones,
and cedars.

7:12 And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed
stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the
house of the LORD, and for the porch of the house.

7:13 And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.

7:14 He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was
a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and
understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to
king Solomon, and wrought all his work.

7:15 For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece:
and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.

7:16 And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops
of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and
the height of the other chapiter was five cubits: 7:17 And nets of
checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were
upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for
the other chapiter.

7:18 And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one
network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with
pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.

7:19 And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of
lily work in the porch, four cubits.

7:20 And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also
above, over against the belly which was by the network: and the
pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the other
chapiter.

7:21 And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set
up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up
the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.

7:22 And upon the top of the pillars was lily work: so was the work of
the pillars finished.

7:23 And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the
other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a
line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.

7:24 And under the brim of it round about there were knops compassing
it, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops were
cast in two rows, when it was cast.

7:25 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and
three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and
three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them,
and all their hinder parts were inward.

7:26 And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was
wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained
two thousand baths.

7:27 And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one
base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height
of it.

7:28 And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders,
and the borders were between the ledges: 7:29 And on the borders that
were between the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the
ledges there was a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen were
certain additions made of thin work.

7:30 And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and
the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver were
undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.

7:31 And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit:
but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit
and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their
borders, foursquare, not round.

7:32 And under the borders were four wheels; and the axletrees of the
wheels were joined to the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit
and half a cubit.

7:33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel:
their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes,
were all molten.

7:34 And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base:
and the undersetters were of the very base itself.

7:35 And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a
cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the
borders thereof were of the same.

7:36 For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders
thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the
proportion of every one, and additions round about.

7:37 After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one
casting, one measure, and one size.

7:38 Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty
baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten
bases one laver.

7:39 And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on
the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of
the house eastward over against the south.

7:40 And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So
Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for
the house of the LORD: 7:41 The two pillars, and the two bowls of the
chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two
networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the
top of the pillars; 7:42 And four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the
two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the pillars; 7:43 And the
ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases; 7:44 And one sea, and twelve
oxen under the sea; 7:45 And the pots, and the shovels, and the
basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for
the house of the LORD, were of bright brass.

7:46 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zarthan.

7:47 And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were
exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.

7:48 And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of
the LORD: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the
shewbread was, 7:49 And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the
right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, 7:50 And the bowls, and the
snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure
gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house,
the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the
temple.

7:51 So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of
the LORD. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had
dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
among the treasures of the house of the LORD.

8:1 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto
king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the
covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.

8:2 And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon
at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.

8:3 And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the
ark.

8:4 And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.

8:5 And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were
assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep
and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

8:6 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD
unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims.

8:7 For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of
the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof
above.

8:8 And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were
seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen
without: and there they are unto this day.

8:9 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which
Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the
children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.

8:10 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud filled the house of the LORD, 8:11 So that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the LORD had filled the house of the LORD.

8:12 Then spake Solomon, The LORD said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.

8:14 And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the
congregation of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)
8:15 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which spake with
his mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
saying, 8:16 Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out
of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an
house, that my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my
people Israel.

8:17 And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

8:18 And the LORD said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine
heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in
thine heart.

8:19 Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my
name.

8:20 And the LORD hath performed his word that he spake, and I am
risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of
Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built an house for the name of
the LORD God of Israel.

8:21 And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the LORD, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of Egypt.

8:22 And Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of
all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward
heaven: 8:23 And he said, LORD God of Israel, there is no God like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
8:24 Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is this day.

8:25 Therefore now, LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a
man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children
take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked
before me.

8:26 And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified,
which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.

8:27 But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I
have builded?  8:28 Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the
cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:
8:29 That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even
toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that
thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make
toward this place.

8:30 And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy
people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou
in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.

8:31 If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid
upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar
in this house: 8:32 Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy
servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and
justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.

8:33 When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because
they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and
confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this
house: 8:34 Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest
unto their fathers.

8:35 When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have
sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy
name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them: 8:36 Then
hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should
walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people
for an inheritance.

8:37 If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting,
mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege
them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sickness there be; 8:38 What prayer and supplication soever be made by
any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the
plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:
8:39 Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do,
and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest;
(for thou, even thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of
men;) 8:40 That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the
land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

8:41 Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel,
but cometh out of a far country for thy name's sake; 8:42 (For they
shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy
stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house;
8:43 Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all
that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth
may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that
they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy
name.

8:44 If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever
thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the LORD toward the city
which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy
name: 8:45 Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their
supplication, and maintain their cause.

8:46 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,)
and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that
they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
8:47 Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they
were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in
the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned,
and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; 8:48 And so
return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the
land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee
toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city
which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:
8:49 Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy
dwelling place, and maintain their cause, 8:50 And forgive thy people
that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein
they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before
them who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them:
8:51 For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
8:52 That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses
thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O LORD
God.

8:54 And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication unto the LORD, he arose from before the
altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.

8:55 And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 Blessed be the LORD, that hath given rest
unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the
hand of Moses his servant.

8:57 The LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him
not leave us, nor forsake us: 8:58 That he may incline our hearts unto
him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his
statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.

8:59 And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before
the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that he
maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel
at all times, as the matter shall require: 8:60 That all the people of
the earth may know that the LORD is God, and that there is none else.

8:61 Let your heart therefore be perfect with the LORD our God, to
walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.

8:62 And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before
the LORD.

8:63 And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
offered unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred
and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel
dedicated the house of the LORD.

8:64 The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was
before the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the
brasen altar that was before the LORD was too little to receive the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a
great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of
Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
goodness that the LORD had done for David his servant, and for Israel
his people.

9:1 And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the
house of the LORD, and the king's house, and all Solomon's desire
which he was pleased to do, 9:2 That the LORD appeared to Solomon the
second time, as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.

9:3 And the LORD said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine
eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

9:4 And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments: 9:5
Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever,
as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a
man upon the throne of Israel.

9:6 But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your
children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I
have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
9:7 Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given
them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast
out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all
people: 9:8 And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth
by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why
hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house?  9:9 And
they shall answer, Because they forsook the LORD their God, who
brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken
hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them:
therefore hath the LORD brought upon them all this evil.

9:10 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had
built the two houses, the house of the LORD, and the king's house,
9:11 (Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar
trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that
then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.

9:12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had
given him; and they pleased him not.

9:13 And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my
brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day.

9:14 And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.

9:15 And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for
to build the house of the LORD, and his own house, and Millo, and the
wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

9:16 For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt
it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and
given it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon's wife.

9:17 And Solomon built Gezer, and Bethhoron the nether, 9:18 And
Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land, 9:19 And all the
cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and
cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build in
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

9:20 And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites,
Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of
Israel, 9:21 Their children that were left after them in the land,
whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy,
upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.

9:22 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but
they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his
captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.

9:23 These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon's
work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that
wrought in the work.

9:24 But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David unto her
house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Millo.

9:25 And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and
peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the LORD, and he
burnt incense upon the altar that was before the LORD. So he finished
the house.

9:26 And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber, which is
beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.

9:27 And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had
knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

9:28 And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four
hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.

10:1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon
concerning the name of the LORD, she came to prove him with hard
questions.

10:2 And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels
that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when
she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her
heart.

10:3 And Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing
hid from the king, which he told her not.

10:4 And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon's wisdom, and
the house that he had built, 10:5 And the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up
unto the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her.

10:6 And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in
mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.

10:7 Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and
prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.

10:8 Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

10:9 Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee
on the throne of Israel: because the LORD loved Israel for ever,
therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

10:10 And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more
such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to
king Solomon.

10:11 And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir,
brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious
stones.

10:12 And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of
the LORD, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for
singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.

10:13 And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal
bounty.

So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.

10:14 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred threescore and six talents of gold, 10:15 Beside that he had
of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of
all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the country.

10:16 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of gold went to one target.

10:17 And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of
gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the
forest of Lebanon.

10:18 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with the best gold.

10:19 The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round
behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat,
and two lions stood beside the stays.

10:20 And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.

10:21 And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all
the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold;
none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of
Solomon.

10:22 For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of
Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

10:23 So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches
and for wisdom.

10:24 And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which
God had put in his heart.

10:25 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and
mules, a rate year by year.

10:26 And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had
a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen,
whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at
Jerusalem.

10:27 And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and
cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for
abundance.

10:28 And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

10:29 And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred
shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for
all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they
bring them out by their means.

11:1 But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the
daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Zidonians, and Hittites: 11:2 Of the nations concerning which the LORD
said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither
shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

11:4 For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned
away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with
the LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father.

11:5 For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians,
and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.

11:6 And Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fully
after the LORD, as did David his father.

11:7 Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination
of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the
abomination of the children of Ammon.

11:8 And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods.

11:9 And the LORD was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned
from the LORD God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 11:10
And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
after other gods: but he kept not that which the LORD commanded.

11:11 Wherefore the LORD said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I
have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy
father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

11:13 Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake
which I have chosen.

11:14 And the LORD stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the
Edomite: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

11:15 For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had
smitten every male in Edom; 11:16 (For six months did Joab remain
there with all Israel, until he had cut off every male in Edom:) 11:17
That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with
him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.

11:18 And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took
men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king
of Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and
gave him land.

11:19 And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he
gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes
the queen.

11:20 And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom
Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh's
household among the sons of Pharaoh.

11:21 And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,
and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh,
Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.

11:22 Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he
answered, Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of
Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah: 11:24 And
he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when David
slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reigned in Damascus.

11:25 And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon,
beside the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhorred Israel, and
reigned over Syria.

11:26 And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda,
Solomon's servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even
he lifted up his hand against the king.

11:27 And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of
David his father.

11:28 And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon
seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over
all the charge of the house of Joseph.

11:29 And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of
Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pieces: 11:31 And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, Behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's
sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of
all the tribes of Israel:) 11:33 Because that they have forsaken me,
and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh
the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon,
and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine
eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his
father.

11:34 Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I
will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant's
sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:
11:35 But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give
it unto thee, even ten tribes.

11:36 And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant
may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have
chosen me to put my name there.

11:37 And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that
thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.

11:38 And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I
will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David,
and will give Israel unto thee.

11:39 And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.

11:40 Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose,
and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt
until the death of Solomon.

11:41 And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and
his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
11:42 And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel
was forty years.

11:43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

12:1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem
to make him king.

12:2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet
in Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king
Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;) 12:3 That they sent and called
him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spake
unto Rehoboam, saying, 12:4 Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

12:5 And he said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again
to me. And the people departed.

12:6 And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before
Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that
I may answer this people?  12:7 And they spake unto him, saying, If
thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy
servants for ever.

12:8 But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given
him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and
which stood before him: 12:9 And he said unto them, What counsel give
ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make
the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter?  12:10 And the
young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus
shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy
father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus
shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my
father's loins.

12:11 And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will
add to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions.

12:12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day,
as the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.

12:13 And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old
men's counsel that they gave him; 12:14 And spake to them after the
counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and
I will add to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but
I will chastise you with scorpions.

12:15 Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause
was from the LORD, that he might perform his saying, which the LORD
spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

12:16 So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them,
the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?
neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O
Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto
their tents.

12:17 But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

12:18 Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and
all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king
Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
Jerusalem.

12:19 So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

12:20 And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was
come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and
made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house
of David, but the tribe of Judah only.

12:21 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the
house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

12:22 But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
12:23 Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto
all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, 12:24 Thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his
house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word
of the LORD, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
LORD.

12:25 Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein;
and went out from thence, and built Penuel.

12:26 And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to
the house of David: 12:27 If this people go up to do sacrifice in the
house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people
turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they
shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.

12:28 Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold,
and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem:
behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt.

12:29 And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan.

12:30 And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship
before the one, even unto Dan.

12:31 And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the
lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.

12:32 And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the
fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and
he offered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the
calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the
high places which he had made.

12:33 So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of
Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.

13:1 And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of
the LORD unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

13:2 And he cried against the altar in the word of the LORD, and said,
O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD; Behold, a child shall be born
unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer
the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's
bones shall be burnt upon thee.

13:3 And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which
the LORD hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it shall be poured out.

13:4 And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the
man of God, which had cried against the altar in Bethel, that he put
forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand,
which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it
in again to him.

13:5 The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar,
according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of
the LORD.

13:6 And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now
the face of the LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be
restored me again. And the man of God besought the LORD, and the
king's hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.

13:7 And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and
refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.

13:8 And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half
thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor
drink water in this place: 13:9 For so was it charged me by the word
of the LORD, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by
the same way that thou camest.

13:10 So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came
to Bethel.

13:11 Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel; and his sons came and
told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in
Bethel: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told
also to their father.

13:12 And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons
had seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.

13:13 And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled
him the ass: and he rode thereon, 13:14 And went after the man of God,
and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, Art thou the
man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.

13:15 Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.

13:16 And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee:
neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:
13:17 For it was said to me by the word of the LORD, Thou shalt eat no
bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou
camest.

13:18 He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel
spake unto me by the word of the LORD, saying, Bring him back with
thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he
lied unto him.

13:19 So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and
drank water.

13:20 And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of
the LORD came unto the prophet that brought him back: 13:21 And he
cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the
LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the LORD, and hast
not kept the commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee, 13:22
But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of
the which the Lord did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water;
thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.

13:23 And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom
he had brought back.

13:24 And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him:
and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion
also stood by the carcase.

13:25 And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way,
and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the
city where the old prophet dwelt.

13:26 And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the
word of the LORD: therefore the LORD hath delivered him unto the lion,
which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the LORD,
which he spake unto him.

13:27 And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they
saddled him.

13:28 And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass
and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the
carcase, nor torn the ass.

13:29 And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid
it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the
city, to mourn and to bury him.

13:30 And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over
him, saying, Alas, my brother!  13:31 And it came to pass, after he
had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead,
then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my
bones beside his bones: 13:32 For the saying which he cried by the
word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel, and against all the
houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall
surely come to pass.

13:33 After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but
made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places:
whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests
of the high places.

13:34 And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to
cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

14:1 At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.

14:2 And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise
thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get
thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me
that I should be king over this people.

14:3 And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of
honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the
child.

14:4 And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and
came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes
were set by reason of his age.

14:5 And the LORD said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam
cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and
thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in,
that she shall feign herself to be another woman.

14:6 And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she
came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why
feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings.

14:7 Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Forasmuch
as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my
people Israel, 14:8 And rent the kingdom away from the house of David,
and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant David, who
kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do
that only which was right in mine eyes; 14:9 But hast done evil above
all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other
gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me
behind thy back: 14:10 Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the
house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will
take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away
dung, till it be all gone.

14:11 Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and
him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the
LORD hath spoken it.

14:12 Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy
feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

14:13 And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of
Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some
good thing toward the LORD God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.

14:14 Moreover the LORD shall raise him up a king over Israel, who
shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.

14:15 For the LORD shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the
water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he
gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river,
because they have made their groves, provoking the LORD to anger.

14:16 And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who
did sin, and who made Israel to sin.

14:17 And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and
when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died; 14:18 And
they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word
of the LORD, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the
prophet.

14:19 And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he
reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.

14:20 And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years:
and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.

14:21 And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was
forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD did choose out
of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's
name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

14:22 And Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD, and they provoked
him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all
that their fathers had done.

14:23 For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on
every high hill, and under every green tree.

14:24 And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did
according to all the abominations of the nations which the LORD cast
out before the children of Israel.

14:25 And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem: 14:26 And he took
away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the
king's house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields
of gold which Solomon had made.

14:27 And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and
committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept
the door of the king's house.

14:28 And it was so, when the king went into the house of the LORD,
that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard
chamber.

14:29 Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
14:30 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.

14:31 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David. And his mother's name was Naamah an
Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.

15:1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat
reigned Abijam over Judah.

15:2 Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his mother's name was
Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

15:3 And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as
the heart of David his father.

15:4 Nevertheless for David's sake did the LORD his God give him a
lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish
Jerusalem: 15:5 Because David did that which was right in the eyes of
the LORD, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him
all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the
Hittite.

15:6 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of
his life.

15:7 Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And
there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

15:8 And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the
city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.

15:9 And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa
over Judah.

15:10 And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his
mother's name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

15:11 And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did
David his father.

15:12 And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all
the idols that his fathers had made.

15:13 And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being
queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her
idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron.

15:14 But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa's heart
was perfect with the LORD all his days.

15:15 And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and
the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the LORD,
silver, and gold, and vessels.

15:16 And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.

15:17 And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built
Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king
of Judah.

15:18 Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the
treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's
house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa
sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of
Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 15:19 There is a league between
me and thee, and between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent
unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break thy league with
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

15:20 So Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of
the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon,
and Dan, and Abelbethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of
Naphtali.

15:21 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard thereof, that he left off
building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.

15:22 Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was
exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber
thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them
Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

15:23 The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that
he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time
of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

15:24 And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
in the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in
his stead.

15:25 And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the
second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.

15:26 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.

15:27 And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar,
conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which
belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to
Gibbethon.

15:28 Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him,
and reigned in his stead.

15:29 And it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the
house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he
had destroyed him, according unto the saying of the LORD, which he
spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite: 15:30 Because of the sins
of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his
provocation wherewith he provoked the LORD God of Israel to anger.

15:31 Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15:32 And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.

15:33 In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of
Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.

15:34 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.

16:1 Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against
Baasha, saying, 16:2 Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and
made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the
way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me
to anger with their sins; 16:3 Behold, I will take away the posterity
of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house
like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

16:4 Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him
that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.

16:5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his
might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel?  16:6 So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in
Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead.

16:7 And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came
the word of the LORD against Baasha, and against his house, even for
all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him to
anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam;
and because he killed him.

16:8 In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the
son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.

16:9 And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired
against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house
of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.

16:10 And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty
and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.

16:11 And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat
on his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not
one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
friends.

16:12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the
word of the LORD, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet.

16:13 For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by
which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking
the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities.

16:14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
16:15 In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri
reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against
Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.

16:16 And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath
conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made
Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.

16:17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and
they besieged Tirzah.

16:18 And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken,
that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's
house over him with fire, and died.

16:19 For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the
LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did,
to make Israel to sin.

16:20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he
wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?  16:21 Then were the people of Israel divided into
two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri.

16:22 But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people
that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri
reigned.

16:23 In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to
reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.

16:24 And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of
silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which
he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria.

16:25 But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the LORD, and did worse
than all that were before him.

16:26 For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and
in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD God of
Israel to anger with their vanities.

16:27 Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might
that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?  16:28 So Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.

16:29 And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began
Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri
reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.

16:30 And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD above
all that were before him.

16:31 And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to
walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife
Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and
served Baal, and worshipped him.

16:32 And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which
he had built in Samaria.

16:33 And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God
of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him.

16:34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD,
which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.

17:1 And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead,
said unto Ahab, As the LORD God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand,
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

17:2 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:3 Get thee
hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith,
that is before Jordan.

17:4 And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have
commanded the ravens to feed thee there.

17:5 So he went and did according unto the word of the LORD: for he
went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.

17:6 And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.

17:7 And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up,
because there had been no rain in the land.

17:8 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:9 Arise, get
thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold,
I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.

17:10 So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate
of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks:
and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water
in a vessel, that I may drink.

17:11 And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.

17:12 And she said, As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but
an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and,
behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

17:13 And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said:
but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and
after make for thee and for thy son.

17:14 For thus saith the LORD God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall
not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the
LORD sendeth rain upon the earth.

17:15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she,
and he, and her house, did eat many days.

17:16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil
fail, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Elijah.

17:17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so
sore, that there was no breath left in him.

17:18 And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou
man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and
to slay my son?  17:19 And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he
took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he
abode, and laid him upon his own bed.

17:20 And he cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her
son?  17:21 And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and
cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, I pray thee, let this
child's soul come into him again.

17:22 And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived.

17:23 And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the
chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah
said, See, thy son liveth.

17:24 And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a
man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth.

18:1 And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the LORD
came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab;
and I will send rain upon the earth.

18:2 And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore
famine in Samaria.

18:3 And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house.
(Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly: 18:4 For it was so, when Jezebel
cut off the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took an hundred
prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water.)  18:5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all
fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find
grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the
beasts.

18:6 So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab
went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.

18:7 And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he
knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord
Elijah?  18:8 And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold,
Elijah is here.

18:9 And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy
servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?  18:10 As the LORD thy God
liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent
to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of
the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.

18:11 And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.

18:12 And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that
the Spirit of the LORD shall carry thee whither I know not; and so
when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me:
but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth.

18:13 Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the
prophets of the LORD, how I hid an hundred men of the LORD's prophets
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?  18:14 And now
thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shall
slay me.

18:15 And Elijah said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I
stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day.

18:16 So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to
meet Elijah.

18:17 And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto
him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel?  18:18 And he answered, I have
not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou hast followed Baalim.

18:19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount
Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the
prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table.

18:20 So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the
prophets together unto mount Carmel.

18:21 And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him: but if Baal,
then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.

18:22 Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a
prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty
men.

18:23 Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
wood, and put no fire under: 18:24 And call ye on the name of your
gods, and I will call on the name of the LORD: and the God that
answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and
said, It is well spoken.

18:25 And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one
bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call
on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.

18:26 And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed
it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon,
saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that
answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made.

18:27 And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said,
Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be
awaked.

18:28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with
knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.

18:29 And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there
was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.

18:30 And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all
the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD
that was broken down.

18:31 And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the
tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came,
saying, Israel shall be thy name: 18:32 And with the stones he built
an altar in the name of the LORD: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.

18:33 And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second
time.

And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time.

18:35 And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the
trench also with water.

18:36 And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, LORD God of
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art
God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all
these things at thy word.

18:37 Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people may know that thou
art the LORD God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

18:38 Then the fire of the LORD fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up
the water that was in the trench.

18:39 And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and
they said, The LORD, he is the God; the LORD, he is the God.

18:40 And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not
one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down
to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.

18:41 And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there
is a sound of abundance of rain.

18:42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the
top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his
face between his knees, 18:43 And said to his servant, Go up now, look
toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is
nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.

18:44 And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold,
there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. And he
said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down
that the rain stop thee not.

18:45 And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black
with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and
went to Jezreel.

18:46 And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and he girded up his
loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.

19:1 And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he
had slain all the prophets with the sword.

19:2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the
gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of
one of them by to morrow about this time.

19:3 And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came
to Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.

19:4 But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came
and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that
he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life;
for I am not better than my fathers.

19:5 And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an
angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.

19:6 And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals,
and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid
him down again.

19:7 And the angel of the LORD came again the second time, and touched
him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for
thee.

19:8 And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of
that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.

19:9 And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold,
the word of the LORD came to him, and he said unto him, What doest
thou here, Elijah?  19:10 And he said, I have been very jealous for
the LORD God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:11 And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD.

And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD
was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD
was not in the earthquake: 19:12 And after the earthquake a fire; but
the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

19:13 And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in
his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave.
And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou
here, Elijah?  19:14 And he said, I have been very jealous for the
LORD God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:15 And the LORD said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the
wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king
over Syria: 19:16 And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be
king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt
thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.

19:17 And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of
Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu
shall Elisha slay.

19:18 Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which
have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.

19:19 So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who
was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the
twelfth: and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.

19:20 And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I
pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee.
And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?
19:21 And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew
them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and
gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after
Elijah, and ministered unto him.

20:1 And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together:
and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and
chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.

20:2 And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and
said unto him, Thus saith Benhadad, 20:3 Thy silver and thy gold is
mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.

20:4 And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king,
according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.

20:5 And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Benhadad,
saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me
thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children; 20:6 Yet I
will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and they
shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall
be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in
their hand, and take it away.

20:7 Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and
said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief: for he
sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and
for my gold; and I denied him not.

20:8 And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not
unto him, nor consent.

20:9 Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad, Tell my lord
the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I
will do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and
brought him word again.

20:10 And Benhadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me,
and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for
all the people that follow me.

20:11 And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him
that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.

20:12 And it came to pass, when Ben-hadad heard this message, as he
was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his
servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array
against the city.

20:13 And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel,
saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou seen all this great multitude?
behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt
know that I am the LORD.

20:14 And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Even
by the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who
shall order the battle? And he answered, Thou.

20:15 Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces,
and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered
all the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.

20:16 And they went out at noon. But Benhadad was drinking himself
drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings
that helped him.

20:17 And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out
first; and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men
come out of Samaria.

20:18 And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them
alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.

20:19 So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of
the city, and the army which followed them.

20:20 And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and
Israel pursued them: and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an
horse with the horsemen.

20:21 And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and
chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.

20:22 And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him,
Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the
return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.

20:23 And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods
are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let
us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger
than they.

20:24 And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his
place, and put captains in their rooms: 20:25 And number thee an army,
like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for
chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we
shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and
did so.

20:26 And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Benhadad
numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.

20:27 And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present,
and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them
like two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.

20:28 And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel,
and said, Thus saith the LORD, Because the Syrians have said, The LORD
is God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, therefore will
I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know
that I am the LORD.

20:29 And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And so
it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the
children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in
one day.

20:30 But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and there a wall fell
upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left. And Benhadad
fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.

20:31 And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that
the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: let us, I pray
thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out
to the king of Israel: peradventure he will save thy life.

20:32 So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their
heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Benhadad
saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? he is
my brother.

20:33 Now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come
from him, and did hastily catch it: and they said, Thy brother
Benhadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Benhadad came forth to
him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.

20:34 And Ben-hadad said unto him, The cities, which my father took
from thy father, I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee
in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send
thee away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent
him away.

20:35 And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his
neighbour in the word of the LORD, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man
refused to smite him.

20:36 Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of
the LORD, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall
slay thee.

And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew
him.

20:37 Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And
the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him.

20:38 So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and
disguised himself with ashes upon his face.

20:39 And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king: and he said,
Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man
turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man: if
by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or
else thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

20:40 And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the
king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast
decided it.

20:41 And he hasted, and took the ashes away from his face; and the
king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.

20:42 And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Because thou hast let
go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people.

20:43 And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased,
and came to Samaria.

21:1 And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the
Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of
Ahab king of Samaria.

21:2 And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I
may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house:
and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem
good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.

21:3 And Naboth said to Ahab, The LORD forbid it me, that I should
give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.

21:4 And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the
word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I
will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down
upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.

21:5 But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy
spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?  21:6 And he said unto her,
Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me
thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee
another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my
vineyard.

21:7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the
kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry:
I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.

21:8 So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his
seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were
in his city, dwelling with Naboth.

21:9 And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set
Naboth on high among the people: 21:10 And set two men, sons of
Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst
blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him,
that he may die.

21:11 And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were
the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as
it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.

21:12 They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.

21:13 And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before
him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth,
in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and
the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him
with stones, that he died.

21:14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is
dead.

21:15 And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned,
and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the
vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for
money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

21:16 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that
Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to
take possession of it.

21:17 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
21:18 Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria:
behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to
possess it.

21:19 And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast
thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him,
saying, Thus saith the LORD, In the place where dogs licked the blood
of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

21:20 And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And
he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work
evil in the sight of the LORD.

21:21 Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the
wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, 21:22 And will make
thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the
house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou
hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.

21:23 And of Jezebel also spake the LORD, saying, The dogs shall eat
Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.

21:24 Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him
that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.

21:25 But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the LORD, whom Jezebel his wife
stirred up.

21:26 And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all
things as did the Amorites, whom the LORD cast out before the children
of Israel.

21:27 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent
his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly.

21:28 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
21:29 Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he
humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but
in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.

22:1 And they continued three years without war between Syria and
Israel.

22:2 And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king
of Judah came down to the king of Israel.

22:3 And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that
Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the
hand of the king of Syria?  22:4 And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt
thou go with me to battle to Ramothgilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the
king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses
as thy horses.

22:5 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the LORD to day.

22:6 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about
four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramothgilead
to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the LORD
shall deliver it into the hand of the king.

22:7 And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD
besides, that we might enquire of him?  22:8 And the king of Israel
said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah,
by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he doth not
prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not
the king say so.

22:9 Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Hasten
hither Micaiah the son of Imlah.

22:10 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat
each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the
entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied
before them.

22:11 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he
said, Thus saith the LORD, With these shalt thou push the Syrians,
until thou have consumed them.

22:12 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to
Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the
king's hand.

22:13 And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him,
saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the
king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of
one of them, and speak that which is good.

22:14 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, what the LORD saith unto
me, that will I speak.

22:15 So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah,
shall we go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And
he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into
the hand of the king.

22:16 And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee
that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the
LORD?  22:17 And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills,
as sheep that have not a shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no
master: let them return every man to his house in peace.

22:18 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell
thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?  22:19
And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD
sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on
his right hand and on his left.

22:20 And the LORD said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up
and fall at Ramothgilead? And one said on this manner, and another
said on that manner.

22:21 And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and
said, I will persuade him.

22:22 And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go
forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And he said, Thou shalt persude him, and prevail also: go forth, and
do so.

22:23 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil
concerning thee.

22:24 But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah
on the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me
to speak unto thee?  22:25 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in
that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

22:26 And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back
unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son; 22:27
And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed
him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I
come in peace.

22:28 And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the LORD hath
not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you.

22:29 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up
to Ramothgilead.

22:30 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the
king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.

22:31 But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that
had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the king of Israel.

22:32 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they
turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.

22:33 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived
that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from
pursuing him.

22:34 And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the
driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host;
for I am wounded.

22:35 And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in
his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran
out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.

22:36 And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the
going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to
his own country.

22:37 So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried
the king in Samaria.

22:38 And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs
licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the
word of the LORD which he spake.

22:39 Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the
ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
22:40 So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in
his stead.

22:41 And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the
fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

22:42 Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to
reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his
mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

22:43 And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not
aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD:
nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people
offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.

22:44 And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

22:45 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he
shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah?  22:46 And the remnant of the
sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he took out
of the land.

22:47 There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.

22:48 Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but
they went not; for the ships were broken at Eziongeber.

22:49 Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.

22:50 And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned
in his stead.

22:51 Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two
years over Israel.

22:52 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: 22:53 For he served
Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the LORD God of
Israel, according to all that his father had done.




The Second Book of the Kings

Commonly Called:

The Fourth Book of the Kings


1:1 Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.

1:2 And Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that
was in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto
them, Go, enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron whether I shall
recover of this disease.

1:3 But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go
up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them,
Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire
of Baalzebub the god of Ekron?  1:4 Now therefore thus saith the LORD,
Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die. And Elijah departed.

1:5 And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them,
Why are ye now turned back?  1:6 And they said unto him, There came a
man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go, turn again unto the king that
sent you, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Is it not because
there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from
that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.

1:7 And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to
meet you, and told you these words?  1:8 And they answered him, He was
an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And
he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

1:9 Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And
he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he
spake unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down.

1:10 And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a
man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and
thy fifty.

And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:11 Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his
fifty.

And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king
said, Come down quickly.

1:12 And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let
fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the
fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:13 And he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty.
And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees
before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I
pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be
precious in thy sight.

1:14 Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two
captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my
life now be precious in thy sight.

1:15 And the angel of the LORD said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be
not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

1:16 And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast
sent messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, is it not
because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word? therefore
thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die.

1:17 So he died according to the word of the LORD which Elijah had
spoken.

And Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son
of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son.

1:18 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?  2:1 And
it came to pass, when the LORD would take up Elijah into heaven by a
whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.

2:2 And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD
hath sent me to Bethel. And Elisha said unto him, As the LORD liveth,
and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went down to
Bethel.

2:3 And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to
Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away
thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:4 And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the
LORD hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.

2:5 And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha,
and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy
master from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:6 And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the LORD
hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on.

2:7 And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view
afar off: and they two stood by Jordan.

2:8 And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the
waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two
went over on dry ground.

2:9 And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said
unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from
thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit
be upon me.

2:10 And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if
not, it shall not be so.

2:11 And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that,
behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.

2:12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more:
and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

2:13 He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went
back, and stood by the bank of Jordan; 2:14 And he took the mantle of
Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is
the LORD God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they
parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over.

2:15 And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho
saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. And they
came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

2:16 And they said unto him, Behold now, there be with thy servants
fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest
peradventure the Spirit of the LORD hath taken him up, and cast him
upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not
send.

2:17 And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. They
sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him
not.

2:18 And when they came again to him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he
said unto them, Did I not say unto you, Go not?  2:19 And the men of
the city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation of this
city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is naught, and the
ground barren.

2:20 And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they
brought it to him.

2:21 And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the
salt in there, and said, Thus saith the LORD, I have healed these
waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or barren land.

2:22 So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying
of Elisha which he spake.

2:23 And he went up from thence unto Bethel: and as he was going up by
the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked
him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.

2:24 And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the
name of the LORD. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood,
and tare forty and two children of them.

2:25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he
returned to Samaria.

3:1 Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve
years.

3:2 And he wrought evil in the sight of the LORD; but not like his
father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that
his father had made.

3:3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.

3:4 And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the
king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand
rams, with the wool.

3:5 But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab
rebelled against the king of Israel.

3:6 And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, and numbered
all Israel.

3:7 And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The
king of Moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against
Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people
as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.

3:8 And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way
through the wilderness of Edom.

3:9 So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of
Edom: and they fetched a compass of seven days' journey: and there was
no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed them.

3:10 And the king of Israel said, Alas! that the LORD hath called
these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab!
3:11 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD,
that we may enquire of the LORD by him? And one of the king of
Israel's servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of
Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of Elijah.

3:12 And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the LORD is with him. So the
king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

3:13 And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with
thee?  get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of
thy mother.

And the king of Israel said unto him, Nay: for the LORD hath called
these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab.

3:14 And Elisha said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I
stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.

3:15 But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the
minstrel played, that the hand of the LORD came upon him.

3:16 And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Make this valley full of
ditches.

3:17 For thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye
see rain; yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye may
drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

3:18 And this is but a light thing in the sight of the LORD: he will
deliver the Moabites also into your hand.

3:19 And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and
shall fell every good tree, and stop all wells of water, and mar every
good piece of land with stones.

3:20 And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was
offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the
country was filled with water.

3:21 And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to
fight against them, they gathered all that were able to put on armour,
and upward, and stood in the border.

3:22 And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the
water, and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as
blood: 3:23 And they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain,
and they have smitten one another: now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.

3:24 And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up
and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they went
forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country.

3:25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land
cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the
wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth
left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and
smote it.

3:26 And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for
him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break
through even unto the king of Edom: but they could not.

3:27 Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his
stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there
was great indignation against Israel: and they departed from him, and
returned to their own land.

4:1 Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the
prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou
knowest that thy servant did fear the LORD: and the creditor is come
to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.

4:2 And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what
hast thou in the house? And she said, Thine handmaid hath not any
thing in the house, save a pot of oil.

4:3 Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy
neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.

4:4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and
upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou
shalt set aside that which is full.

4:5 So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her
sons, who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.

4:6 And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said
unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is
not a vessel more. And the oil stayed.

4:7 Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the
oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

4:8 And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a
great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that
as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.

4:9 And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is
an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually.

4:10 Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let
us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a
candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn
in thither.

4:11 And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into
the chamber, and lay there.

4:12 And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when
he had called her, she stood before him.

4:13 And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been
careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee?
wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the
host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

4:14 And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi
answered, Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.

4:15 And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in
the door.

4:16 And he said, About this season, according to the time of life,
thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, thou man of God,
do not lie unto thine handmaid.

4:17 And the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that
Elisha had said unto her, according to the time of life.

4:18 And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out
to his father to the reapers.

4:19 And he said unto his father, My head, my head. And he said to a
lad, Carry him to his mother.

4:20 And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat
on her knees till noon, and then died.

4:21 And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and
shut the door upon him, and went out.

4:22 And she called unto her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee,
one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man
of God, and come again.

4:23 And he said, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither
new moon, nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.

4:24 Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go
forward; slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee.

4:25 So she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it
came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to
Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that Shunammite: 4:26 Run now, I
pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it
well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she answered, It
is well: 4:27 And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she
caught him by the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And
the man of God said, Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her:
and the LORD hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

4:28 Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do
not deceive me?  4:29 Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and
take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man,
salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay
my staff upon the face of the child.

4:30 And the mother of the child said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.

4:31 And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the
face of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore
he went again to meet him, and told him, saying, The child is not
awaked.

4:32 And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was
dead, and laid upon his bed.

4:33 He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and
prayed unto the LORD.

4:34 And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon
his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands:
and stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed
warm.

4:35 Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went
up, and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times,
and the child opened his eyes.

4:36 And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he
called her. And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy
son.

4:37 Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the
ground, and took up her son, and went out.

4:38 And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth in the
land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him: and he
said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for
the sons of the prophets.

4:39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and
shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

4:40 So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as
they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou
man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat thereof.

4:41 But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot; and he
said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no
harm in the pot.

4:42 And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of
God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears
of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that
they may eat.

4:43 And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred
men?  He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus
saith the LORD, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.

4:44 So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof,
according to the word of the LORD.

5:1 Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great
man with his master, and honourable, because by him the LORD had given
deliverance unto Syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was
a leper.

5:2 And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away
captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on
Naaman's wife.

5:3 And she said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the
prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.

5:4 And one went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the
maid that is of the land of Israel.

5:5 And the king of Syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter
unto the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten
talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of
raiment.

5:6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, Now when
this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my
servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.

5:7 And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter,
that he rent his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make
alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his
leprosy? wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a
quarrel against me.

5:8 And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king
of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying,
Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he
shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.

5:9 So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at
the door of the house of Elisha.

5:10 And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in
Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou
shalt be clean.

5:11 But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought,
He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the
LORD his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the
leper.

5:12 Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all
the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he
turned and went away in a rage.

5:13 And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My
father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou
not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash,
and be clean?  5:14 Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times
in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh
came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

5:15 And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and
came, and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there
is no God in all the earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee,
take a blessing of thy servant.

5:16 But he said, As the LORD liveth, before whom I stand, I will
receive none. And he urged him to take it; but he refused.

5:17 And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to
thy servant two mules' burden of earth? for thy servant will
henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods,
but unto the LORD.

5:18 In this thing the LORD pardon thy servant, that when my master
goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself
in the house of Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant in this thing.

5:19 And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a
little way.

5:20 But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold,
my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his
hands that which he brought: but, as the LORD liveth, I will run after
him, and take somewhat of him.

5:21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running
after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is
all well?  5:22 And he said, All is well. My master hath sent me,
saying, Behold, even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two
young men of the sons of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a
talent of silver, and two changes of garments.

5:23 And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him,
and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of
garments, and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them
before him.

5:24 And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and
bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.

5:25 But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto
him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no
whither.

5:26 And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when the man
turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive
money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and
sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?  5:27 The leprosy
therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for
ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.

6:1 And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the
place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.

6:2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a
beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he
answered, Go ye.

6:3 And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants.
And he answered, I will go.

6:4 So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down
wood.

6:5 But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water:
and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.

6:6 And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the
place.

And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did
swim.

6:7 Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand,
and took it.

6:8 Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel
with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.

6:9 And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware
that thou pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come
down.

6:10 And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God
told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor
twice.

6:11 Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for
this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye
not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel?  6:12 And one of
his servants said, None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, the prophet that
is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest
in thy bedchamber.

6:13 And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch
him.

And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.

6:14 Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

6:15 And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone
forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and
chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we
do?  6:16 And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.

6:17 And Elisha prayed, and said, LORD, I pray thee, open his eyes,
that he may see. And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man; and he
saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire
round about Elisha.

6:18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the LORD, and
said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote
them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.

6:19 And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, neither is this
the city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But
he led them to Samaria.

6:20 And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that
Elisha said, LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And
the LORD opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in
the midst of Samaria.

6:21 And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My
father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?  6:22 And he answered,
Thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast
taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? set bread and water
before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.

6:23 And he prepared great provision for them: and when they had eaten
and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the
bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

6:24 And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria
gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.

6:25 And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they
besieged it, until an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of
silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of
silver.

6:26 And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there
cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.

6:27 And he said, If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall I help
thee?  out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?  6:28 And the
king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman
said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will
eat my son to morrow.

6:29 So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the
next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

6:30 And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman,
that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the
people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.

6:31 Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of
Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.

6:32 But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the
king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he
said to the elders, See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to
take away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master's feet
behind him?  6:33 And while he yet talked with them, behold, the
messenger came down unto him: and he said, Behold, this evil is of the
LORD; what should I wait for the LORD any longer?  7:1 Then Elisha
said, Hear ye the word of the LORD; Thus saith the LORD, To morrow
about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel,
and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.

7:2 Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God,
and said, Behold, if the LORD would make windows in heaven, might this
thing be?  And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but
shalt not eat thereof.

7:3 And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate:
and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die?  7:4 If we
say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and
we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. Now
therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if they
save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.

7:5 And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the
Syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of
Syria, behold, there was no man there.

7:6 For the LORD had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of
chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and
they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us
the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come
upon us.

7:7 Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their
tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and
fled for their life.

7:8 And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp, they
went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver,
and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and
entered into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid
it.

7:9 Then they said one to another, We do not well: this day is a day
of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning
light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore come, that we
may go and tell the king's household.

7:10 So they came and called unto the porter of the city: and they
told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold,
there was no man there, neither voice of man, but horses tied, and
asses tied, and the tents as they were.

7:11 And he called the porters; and they told it to the king's house
within.

7:12 And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants, I
will now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we
be hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves
in the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we shall catch
them alive, and get into the city.

7:13 And one of his servants answered and said, Let some take, I pray
thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city,
(behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it:
behold, I say, they are even as all the multitude of the Israelites
that are consumed:) and let us send and see.

7:14 They took therefore two chariot horses; and the king sent after
the host of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.

7:15 And they went after them unto Jordan: and, lo, all the way was
full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their
haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.

7:16 And the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the Syrians. So
a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of
barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.

7:17 And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have
the charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and
he died, as the man of God had said, who spake when the king came down
to him.

7:18 And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king,
saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine
flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of
Samaria: 7:19 And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now,
behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might such a thing
be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt
not eat thereof.

7:20 And so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the
gate, and he died.

8:1 Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to
life, saying, Arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn
wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the LORD hath called for a famine;
and it shall also come upon the land seven years.

8:2 And the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of God:
and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the
Philistines seven years.

8:3 And it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman
returned out of the land of the Philistines: and she went forth to cry
unto the king for her house and for her land.

8:4 And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God,
saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath
done.

8:5 And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had
restored a dead body to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he
had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her
land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is
her son, whom Elisha restored to life.

8:6 And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king
appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was
hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the
land, even until now.

8:7 And Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was
sick; and it was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither.

8:8 And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine hand, and
go, meet the man of God, and enquire of the LORD by him, saying, Shall
I recover of this disease?  8:9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took a
present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels'
burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Benhadad king
of Syria hath sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this
disease?  8:10 And Elisha said unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest
certainly recover: howbeit the LORD hath shewed me that he shall
surely die.

8:11 And he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed:
and the man of God wept.

8:12 And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I
know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their
strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women
with child.

8:13 And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog, that he should
do this great thing? And Elisha answered, The LORD hath shewed me that
thou shalt be king over Syria.

8:14 So he departed from Elisha, and came to his master; who said to
him, What said Elisha to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou
shouldest surely recover.

8:15 And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth,
and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died:
and Hazael reigned in his stead.

8:16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel,
Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Je hoshaphat
king of Judah began to reign.

8:17 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

8:18 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house
of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the
sight of the LORD.

8:19 Yet the LORD would not destroy Judah for David his servant's
sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his
children.

8:20 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made
a king over themselves.

8:21 So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he
rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and
the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.

8:22 Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.
Then Libnah revolted at the same time.

8:23 And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?  8:24
And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of David: and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

8:25 In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did
Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.

8:26 Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and
he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah,
the daughter of Omri king of Israel.

8:27 And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in
the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab: for he was the son in
law of the house of Ahab.

8:28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against Hazael
king of Syria in Ramothgilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.

8:29 And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against
Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah
went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was
sick.

9:1 And Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets,
and said unto him, Gird up thy loins, and take this box of oil in
thine hand, and go to Ramothgilead: 9:2 And when thou comest thither,
look out there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go
in, and make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an
inner chamber; 9:3 Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head,
and say, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee king over Israel.
Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.

9:4 So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to
Ramothgilead.

9:5 And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting;
and he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, Unto
which of all us? And he said, To thee, O captain.

9:6 And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on
his head, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I have
anointed thee king over the people of the LORD, even over Israel.

9:7 And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may
avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the
servants of the LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.

9:8 For the whole house of Ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from
Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in Israel: 9:9 And I will make the house of Ahab like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah: 9:10 And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel,
and there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.

9:11 Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said
unto him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he
said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.

9:12 And they said, It is false; tell us now. And he said, Thus and
thus spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee
king over Israel.

9:13 Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it
under him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying,
Jehu is king.

9:14 So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired
against Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ramothgilead, he and all Israel,
because of Hazael king of Syria.

9:15 But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of
Syria.)  And Jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth
nor escape out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.

9:16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay
there.

And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.

9:17 And there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied
the company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram
said, Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it
peace?  9:18 So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said,
Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What hast thou to do
with peace? turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The
messenger came to them, but he cometh not again.

9:19 Then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and
said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What hast
thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

9:20 And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh
not again: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of
Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.

9:21 And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And
Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his
chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of
Naboth the Jezreelite.

9:22 And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it
peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of
thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?  9:23 And Joram
turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O
Ahaziah.

9:24 And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram
between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk
down in his chariot.

9:25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in
the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how
that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the LORD
laid this burden upon him; 9:26 Surely I have seen yesterday the blood
of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the LORD; and I will
requite thee in this plat, saith the LORD. Now therefore take and cast
him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the LORD.

9:27 But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him
also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is
by Ibleam.

And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.

9:28 And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and
buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David.

9:29 And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah
to reign over Judah.

9:30 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she
painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

9:31 And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace,
who slew his master?  9:32 And he lifted up his face to the window,
and said, Who is on my side?  who? And there looked out to him two or
three eunuchs.

9:33 And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of
her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode
her under foot.

9:34 And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see
now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king's daughter.

9:35 And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the
skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.

9:36 Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the
word of the LORD, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite,
saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel:
9:37 And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the
field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is
Jezebel.

10:1 And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and
sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to
them that brought up Ahab's children, saying, 10:2 Now as soon as this
letter cometh to you, seeing your master's sons are with you, and
there are with you chariots and horses, a fenced city also, and
armour; 10:3 Look even out the best and meetest of your master's sons,
and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your master's house.

10:4 But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, two kings
stood not before him: how then shall we stand?  10:5 And he that was
over the house, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and
the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy
servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any
king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.

10:6 Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be
mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the
men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this
time. Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great
men of the city, which brought them up.

10:7 And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took
the king's sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in
baskets, and sent him them to Jezreel.

10:8 And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, They have
brought the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two
heaps at the entering in of the gate until the morning.

10:9 And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood,
and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired
against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these?  10:10 Know
now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the
LORD, which the LORD spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the LORD
hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah.

10:11 So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel,
and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he
left him none remaining.

10:12 And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at
the shearing house in the way, 10:13 Jehu met with the brethren of
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are
the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of the
king and the children of the queen.

10:14 And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew
them at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither
left he any of them.

10:15 And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son
of Rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is
thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab
answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his
hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.

10:16 And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD. So they
made him ride in his chariot.

10:17 And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab
in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the
LORD, which he spake to Elijah.

10:18 And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them,
Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much.

10:19 Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his
servants, and all his priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great
sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not
live. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy
the worshippers of Baal.

10:20 And Jehu said, Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. And they
proclaimed it.

10:21 And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of
Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they
came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full from one
end to another.

10:22 And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth
vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth
vestments.

10:23 And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house
of Baal, and said unto the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that
there be here with you none of the servants of the LORD, but the
worshippers of Baal only.

10:24 And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings,
Jehu appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom
I have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his
life shall be for the life of him.

10:25 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering
the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains,
Go in, and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with
the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out,
and went to the city of the house of Baal.

10:26 And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and
burned them.

10:27 And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down the house
of Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day.

10:28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.

10:29 Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden
calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

10:30 And the LORD said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the
house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of
the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.

10:31 But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the LORD God of
Israel with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.

10:32 In those days the LORD began to cut Israel short: and Hazael
smote them in all the coasts of Israel; 10:33 From Jordan eastward,
all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the
Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and
Bashan.

10:34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all
his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?  10:35 And Jehu slept with his fathers: and they
buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.

10:36 And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty
and eight years.

11:1 And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.

11:2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah,
took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's
sons which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in
the bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.

11:3 And he was with her hid in the house of the LORD six years. And
Athaliah did reign over the land.

11:4 And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over
hundreds, with the captains and the guard, and brought them to him
into the house of the LORD, and made a covenant with them, and took an
oath of them in the house of the LORD, and shewed them the king's son.

11:5 And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall
do; A third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be
keepers of the watch of the king's house; 11:6 And a third part shall
be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard:
so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.

11:7 And two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they
shall keep the watch of the house of the LORD about the king.

11:8 And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his
weapons in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be
slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

11:9 And the captains over the hundreds did according to all things
that Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men
that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on
the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.

11:10 And to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king
David's spears and shields, that were in the temple of the LORD.

11:11 And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand,
round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left
corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

11:12 And he brought forth the king's son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him;
and they clapped their hands, and said, God save the king.

11:13 And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the
people, she came to the people into the temple of the LORD.

11:14 And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all
the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and Athaliah
rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, Treason.

11:15 But Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds,
the officers of the host, and said unto them, Have her forth without
the ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. For the
priest had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the LORD.

11:16 And they laid hands on her; and she went by the way by the which
the horses came into the king's house: and there was she slain.

11:17 And Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and
the people, that they should be the LORD's people; between the king
also and the people.

11:18 And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and
brake it down; his altars and his images brake they in pieces
thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And
the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD.

11:19 And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the captains, and the
guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king
from the house of the LORD, and came by the way of the gate of the
guard to the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.

11:20 And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in
quiet: and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king's house.

11:21 Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.

12:1 In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty
years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zibiah of
Beersheba.

12:2 And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all
his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.

12:3 But the high places were not taken away: the people still
sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.

12:4 And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the dedicated
things that is brought into the house of the LORD, even the money of
every one that passeth the account, the money that every man is set
at, and all the money that cometh into any man's heart to bring into
the house of the LORD, 12:5 Let the priests take it to them, every man
of his acquaintance: and let them repair the breaches of the house,
wheresoever any breach shall be found.

12:6 But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king
Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.

12:7 Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other
priests, and said unto them, Why repair ye not the breaches of the
house? now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but
deliver it for the breaches of the house.

12:8 And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people,
neither to repair the breaches of the house.

12:9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid
of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh
into the house of the LORD: and the priests that kept the door put
therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.

12:10 And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the
chest, that the king's scribe and the high priest came up, and they
put up in bags, and told the money that was found in the house of the
LORD.

12:11 And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that
did the work, that had the oversight of the house of the LORD: and
they laid it out to the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the
house of the LORD, 12:12 And to masons, and hewers of stone, and to
buy timber and hewed stone to repair the breaches of the house of the
LORD, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.

12:13 Howbeit there were not made for the house of the LORD bowls of
silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of
silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the LORD:
12:14 But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the
house of the LORD.

12:15 Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they
delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen: for they dealt
faithfully.

12:16 The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house
of the LORD: it was the priests'.

12:17 Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and
took it: and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.

12:18 And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that
Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah,
had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was
found in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and in the king's
house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria: and he went away from
Jerusalem.

12:19 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
12:20 And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in
the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.

12:21 For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of
Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with
his fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his
stead.

13:1 In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king
of Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in
Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.

13:2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and
followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to
sin; he departed not therefrom.

13:3 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the
hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, all their days.

13:4 And Jehoahaz besought the LORD, and the LORD hearkened unto him:
for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria
oppressed them.

13:5 (And the LORD gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from
under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in
their tents, as beforetime.

13:6 Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of
Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained
the grove also in Samaria.)  13:7 Neither did he leave of the people
to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand
footmen; for the king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them
like the dust by threshing.

13:8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and
his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?  13:9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they
buried him in Samaria: and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

13:10 In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began
Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and
reigned sixteen years.

13:11 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel sin: but he walked therein.

13:12 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his
might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?  13:13
And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne:
and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

13:14 Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And
Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face,
and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof.

13:15 And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows. And he took unto
him bow and arrows.

13:16 And he said to the king of Israel, Put thine hand upon the bow.
And he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king's
hands.

13:17 And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then
Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, The arrow of the LORD's
deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria: for thou shalt
smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.

13:18 And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said unto
the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and
stayed.

13:19 And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest
have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till
thou hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.

13:20 And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the
Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.

13:21 And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of
Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

13:22 But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of
Jehoahaz.

13:23 And the LORD was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from his presence as yet.

13:24 So Hazael king of Syria died; and Benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.

13:25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of Israel.

14:1 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel
reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.

14:2 He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

14:3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, yet not
like David his father: he did according to all things as Joash his
father did.

14:4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people
did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

14:5 And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

14:6 But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the
LORD commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every
man shall be put to death for his own sin.

14:7 He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took
Selah by war, and called the name of it Joktheel unto this day.

14:8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son
of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the
face.

14:9 And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah,
saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in
Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed
by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

14:10 Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee
up: glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to
thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?
14:11 But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel
went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the
face at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

14:12 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled
every man to their tents.

14:13 And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son
of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Bethshemesh, and came to Jerusalem,
and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the
corner gate, four hundred cubits.

14:14 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that
were found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the
king's house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.

14:15 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might,
and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in
the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?  14:16 And Jehoash
slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of
Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

14:17 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death
of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

14:18 And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?  14:19 Now they made a
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled to Lachish; but they
sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.

14:20 And they brought him on horses: and he was buried at Jerusalem
with his fathers in the city of David.

14:21 And all the people of Judah took Azariah, which was sixteen
years old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.

14:22 He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king
slept with his fathers.

14:23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria,
and reigned forty and one years.

14:24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

14:25 He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto
the sea of the plain, according to the word of the LORD God of Israel,
which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai,
the prophet, which was of Gathhepher.

14:26 For the LORD saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very
bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper
for Israel.

14:27 And the LORD said not that he would blot out the name of Israel
from under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son
of Joash.

14:28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and
his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath,
which belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?  14:29 And Jeroboam slept
with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zachariah his son
reigned in his stead.

15:1 In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began
Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.

15:2 Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned
two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecholiah
of Jerusalem.

15:3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his father Amaziah had done; 15:4 Save that the
high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt incense
still on the high places.

15:5 And the LORD smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day
of his death, and dwelt in a several house. And Jotham the king's son
was over the house, judging the people of the land.

15:6 And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
15:7 So Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his
fathers in the city of David: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

15:8 In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did
Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.

15:9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his
fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

15:10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote
him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

15:11 And the rest of the acts of Zachariah, behold, they are written
in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

15:12 This was the word of the LORD which he spake unto Jehu, saying,
Thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth generation.
And so it came to pass.

15:13 Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in
Samaria.

15:14 For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to
Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him,
and reigned in his stead.

15:15 And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he
made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.

15:16 Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the
coasts thereof from Tirzah: because they opened not to him, therefore
he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped
up.

15:17 In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began
Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in
Samaria.

15:18 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin.

15:19 And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem
gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him
to confirm the kingdom in his hand.

15:20 And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty
men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the
king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not
there in the land.

15:21 And the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15:22 And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned
in his stead.

15:23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son
of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two
years.

15:24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

15:25 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired
against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's
house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites:
and he killed him, and reigned in his room.

15:26 And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did,
behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel.

15:27 In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the
son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned
twenty years.

15:28 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

15:29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king of
Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abelbethmaachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh,
and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and
carried them captive to Assyria.

